---
ingested_at: '2026-04-08'
page_count: 86
source_type: pdf
source_url: https://api-handbook.fca.org.uk/files/sourcebook/PRIN.pdf
sourcebook: PRIN
title: Principles for Businesses
toc_entries: 0
---

[PAGE 1]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
.
.
.
.
.
SOURCEBOOK
PRIN Principles for Businesses

[PAGE 2]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
Table of Contents
PRIN 1 Introduction
PRIN 1.1 Application and purpose
PRIN 1.2 Clients and the Principles
PRIN 1 Annex 1 Non-designated investment business - clients that a firm may treat as 
an eligible counterparty for the purposes of PRIN
PRIN 2 The Principles
PRIN 2.1 The Principles
PRIN 2A The Consumer Duty
PRIN 2A.1 Application and purpose
PRIN 2A.2 Cross-cutting obligations
PRIN 2A.3 Consumer Duty: retail customer outcome - products and services
PRIN 2A.4 Consumer Duty: retail customer outcome on price and value
PRIN 2A.5 Consumer Duty: retail customer outcome on consumer understanding
PRIN 2A.6 Consumer Duty: retail customer outcome on consumer support
PRIN 2A.7 General
PRIN 2A.8 Governance and culture
PRIN 2A.9 Monitoring of consumer outcomes
PRIN 2A.10 Redress or other appropriate action
PRIN 2A.11 Sale and purchase of product books
PRIN 3 Rules about application
PRIN 3.1 Who?
PRIN 3.2 What?
PRIN 3.3 Where?
PRIN 3.4 General
PRIN 4 Principles: MiFID business
PRIN 4.1 Principles: MiFID business
PRIN TP 1 Transitional provisions
PRIN TP 1 Transitional provisions
PRIN Sch 1 Record Keeping Requirements

[PAGE 3]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
PRIN Sch 1 Record Keeping Requirements
PRIN Sch 2 Notification requirements
PRIN Sch 2 Notification requirements
PRIN Sch 3 Fees and other required payments
PRIN Sch 3 Fees and other required payments
PRIN Sch 4 Powers Exercised
PRIN Sch 4 Powers Exercised
PRIN Sch 5 Rights of action for damages
PRIN Sch 5 Rights of action for damages
PRIN Sch 6 Rules that can be waived
PRIN Sch 6 Rules that can be waived

[PAGE 4]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
.
.
.
.
.
CHAPTER
PRIN 1 Introduction
PRIN 1 Introduction

[PAGE 5]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
Section : PRIN 1.1 Application and purpose
Application
PRIN 1.1.1G
The Principles (see PRIN 2) apply in whole or in part to every firm. The application of the 
Principles is modified for firms conducting MiFID business and Annex II benchmark 
administrators. PRIN 3 (Rules about application) specifies to whom, to what and where the 
Principles apply.
PRIN 1.1.1AG
The Principles also apply to certain payment service providers and electronic money issuers 
that are not firms. PRIN 3.1.1AR sets out the application of the Principles to these persons. 
The references to a firm in PRIN 2 includes such persons.
Purpose
PRIN 1.1.2G
The Principles are a general statement of the fundamental obligations of firms and the other 
persons to whom they apply under the regulatory system. They derive their authority from 
the FCA’s rule-making powers as set out in the Act, including as applied by the Payment 
Services Regulations and the Electronic Money Regulations, and reflect the statutory 
objectives.
Link to fit and proper standard
PRIN 1.1.4G
In substance, the Principles express the main dimensions of the "fit and proper" standard 
set for firms in threshold condition 5 (Suitability), although they do not derive their authority 
from that standard or exhaust its implications. Being ready, willing and organised to abide by 
the Principles is therefore a critical factor in applications for Part 4A permission, and 
breaching the Principles may call into question whether a firm with Part 4A permission is still 
fit and proper.
PRIN 1.1.4AG
For persons authorised or registered under the Payment Services Regulations or the 
Electronic Money Regulations, the relevant “fit and proper standards” are the standards set 
in those Regulations.
Taking group activities into account
PRIN 1.1.5G
Principles 3 (Management and control), 4 (Financial prudence) and (in so far as it relates to 
disclosing to the FCA ) 11 (Relations with regulators) take into account the activities of 
members of a firm's group. Compliance by another person to whom the Principles apply with 
Principles 3, 4 and 11 can also be affected by the activities of other persons who are 
members of their group. This does not mean that, for example, inadequacy of a group 
member's risk management systems or resources will automatically lead to a firm 
contravening Principle 3 or 4. Rather, the potential impact of a group member's activities 
(and, for example, risk management systems operating on a group basis) will be relevant in 
determining the adequacy of the firm's risk management systems or resources respectively.
Standards in markets outside the United Kingdom

[PAGE 6]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
PRIN 1.1.6G
As set out in PRIN 3.3 (Where?), Principles 1 (Integrity), 2 (Skill, care and diligence) and 3 
(Management and control) apply to world-wide activities in a prudential context. Principle 5 
(Market conduct) applies to world-wide activities which might have a negative effect on 
confidence in the UK financial system. In considering whether to take regulatory action 
under these Principles in relation to activities carried on outside the United Kingdom, the 
FCA will take into account the standards expected in the market in which the firm or other 
person to whom the Principles apply is operating. Principle 11 (Relations with regulators) 
applies to world-wide activities; in considering whether to take regulatory action under 
Principle 11 in relation to cooperation with an overseas regulator, the FCA will have regard 
to the extent of, and limits to, the duties owed by the firm or other person to that regulator. 
(Principle 4 (Financial prudence) also applies to world-wide activities.)
PRIN 1.1.6AG
PRIN 4 (Principles : MiFID Business) provides guidance on the application of the Principles 
to MiFID business.
Consequences of breaching the Principles
PRIN 1.1.7G
Breaching a Principle makes a firm or other person to whom the Principles apply liable to 
disciplinary sanctions. In determining whether a Principle has been breached it is necessary 
to look to the standard of conduct required by the Principle in question. Under each of the 
Principles the onus will be on the FCA to show that a firm or other person has been at fault 
in some way. What constitutes "fault" varies between different Principles. Under Principle 1 
(Integrity), for example, the FCA would need to demonstrate a lack of integrity in the conduct 
of a firm's or other person’s business. Under Principle 2 (Skill, care and diligence) a firm or 
other person would be in breach if it was shown to have failed to act with due skill, care and 
diligence in the conduct of its business. Similarly, under Principle 3 (Management and 
control) a firm or other person would not be in breach simply because it failed to control or 
prevent unforeseeable risks; but a breach would occur if the firm or other person had failed 
to take reasonable care to organise and control its affairs responsibly or effectively.
PRIN 1.1.8G
The Principles are also relevant to the FCA's powers of information-gathering, to vary a 
firm's Part 4A permission or authorisation or registration under the Payment Services 
Regulations or Electronic Money Regulations, and of investigation and intervention, and 
provide a basis on which the FCA may apply to a court for an injunction or restitution order 
or require a firm or other person to make restitution. However, the Principles do not give rise 
to actions for damages by a private person (see PRIN 3.4.4 R).
PRIN 1.1.9G
Some of the other rules and guidance in the Handbook deal with the bearing of the 
Principles upon particular circumstances. However, since the Principles are also designed 
as a general statement of regulatory requirements applicable in new or unforeseen 
situations, and in situations in which there is no need for guidance, the FCA's other rules 
and guidance or onshored regulations should not be viewed as exhausting the implications 
of the Principles themselves.
Responsibilities of providers and distributors under the Principles

[PAGE 7]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
PRIN 1.1.10G
RPPD contains guidance on the responsibilities of providers and distributors for the fair 
treatment of customers under the Principles.

[PAGE 8]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
Section : PRIN 1.2 Clients and the Principles
Characteristics of the client
PRIN 1.2.1G
Principles 6 (Customers' interests), 7 (Communications with clients), 8 (Conflicts of interest), 
9 (Customers: relationships of trust), 10 (Clients’ assets) and 12 (Consumer Duty) impose 
requirements on firms expressly in relation to their clients or customers. These requirements 
depend, in part, on the characteristics of the client or customer concerned. This is because 
what is "due regard" (in Principles 6 and 7), "fairly" (in Principles 6 and 8), "clear, fair and not 
misleading" (in Principle 7), "reasonable care" (in Principle 9), “adequate” (in Principle 10) or 
“good outcomes” (in Principle 12) will, of course, depend on those characteristics.
Acting through an agent
PRIN 1.2.6G
If the person with or for whom the firm is carrying on an activity is acting through an agent, 
the ability of the firm to treat the agent as its client under COBS 2.4.3 R (Agent as client) will 
not be available. For example, if a general insurer is effecting a general insurance contract 
through a general insurance broker who is acting as agent for a disclosed policyholder, the 
policyholder will be a client of the firm and the firm must comply with the Principles 
accordingly.

[PAGE 9]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
Section : PRIN 1 Annex 1 Non-designated investment business - clients that a firm may 
treat as an eligible counterparty for the purposes of PRIN
1.1
A firm may categorise the following types of client as an eligible 
counterparty for the purposes of PRIN:
(1)
a properly constituted government (including a quasi-
governmental body or a government agency) of any 
country or territory;
(2)
a central bank or other national monetary authority of 
any country or territory;
(3)
a supranational whose members are either countries 
or central banks or national monetary authorities;
(4)
a State investment body, or a body charged with, or 
intervening in, the management of the public debt at 
national level;
(5)
another firm, or an overseas financial services 
institution;
(6)
any associate of a firm (except an OPS firm), or of an 
overseas financial services institution, if the firm or 
institution consents;
(7)
a client when he is classified as an eligible 
counterparty in accordance with 1.2; or
(8)
a recognised investment exchange, EU regulated 
market or clearing house.
1.2
A firm may classify a client (other than another firm, regulated collective 
investment scheme, or an overseas financial services institution) as an 
eligible counterparty for the purposes of PRIN under 1.1(7) if:
(1)
the client at the time he is classified is one of the 
following:
(a)
a body corporate (including a 
limited liability partnership) which 
has (or any of whose holding 
companies or subsidiaries has) 
called up share capital of at least 
£10 million (or its equivalent in any 
other currency at the relevant 
time);

[PAGE 10]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
(b)
a body corporate that meets (or 
any of whose holding companies 
or subsidiaries meets) two of the 
following tests:
(i)
a balance sheet 
total of 12.5 
million euros (or 
its equivalent in 
any other 
currency at the 
relevant time);
(ii)
a net turnover of 
25 million euros 
(or its 
equivalent in 
any other 
currency at the 
relevant time);
(iii)
an average 
number of 
employees 
during the year 
of 250;
(c)
[deleted]
(d)
a partnership or unincorporated 
association which has net assets 
of at least £10 million (or its 
equivalent in any other currency at 
the relevant time) (and calculated, 
in the case of a limited 
partnership, without deducting 
loans owing to any of the 
partners);
a trustee of a trust (other than an 
occupational pension scheme, 
SSAS, personal pension scheme 
or stakeholder pension scheme) 
with assets of at least £10 million 
(or its equivalent in any other 
currency), calculated by 
aggregating the value of the cash 
(e)

[PAGE 11]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
and designated investments 
forming part of the trust's assets, 
but before deducting its liabilities;
(f)
a trustee of an occupational 
pension scheme or SSAS, or a 
trustee or operator of a personal 
pension scheme or stakeholder 
pension scheme where the 
scheme has (or has had at any 
time during the previous two 
years):
(i)
at least 50 
members; and
(ii)
assets under 
management of 
not less than 
£10 million (or 
its equivalent in 
any other 
currency at the 
relevant time); 
and
(2)
the firm has, before commencing business with the 
client on an eligible counterparty basis:
(a)
advised the client in writing that he 
is being categorised as an eligible 
counterparty for the purposes of 
PRIN;
(b)
given a written warning to the 
client that he will lose protections 
under the regulatory system;
(c)
for a client falling under (1)(a) or 
(b):
taken 
reasonable 
steps to ensure 
that the written 
notices required 
by (a) and (b) 
have been 
(i)

[PAGE 12]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
delivered to a 
person 
authorised to 
take such a 
decision for the 
client; and
(ii)
not been 
notified by the 
client that the 
client objects to 
being classified 
as an eligible 
counterparty;
(d)
for a client falling under (1)(c), (d), 
(e) or (f):
(i)
taken 
reasonable 
steps to ensure 
that the written 
notices required 
by (a) and (b) 
have been 
delivered to a 
person 
authorised to 
take such a 
decision for the 
client; and
(ii)
obtained the 
client's written 
consent or is 
otherwise able 
to demonstrate 
that consent 
has been given.
.
.

[PAGE 13]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
.
.
.
.
.
CHAPTER
PRIN 2 The Principles
PRIN 2 The Principles

[PAGE 14]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
Section : PRIN 2.1 The Principles
The Principles
PRIN 2.1.1R
1 Integrity
A firm must conduct its business with 
integrity.
2 Skill, care and diligence
A firm must conduct its business with 
due skill, care and diligence.
3 Management and control
A firm must take reasonable care to 
organise and control its affairs 
responsibly and effectively, with 
adequate risk management systems.
4 Financial prudence
A firm must maintain adequate 
financial resources.
5 Market conduct
A firm must observe proper 
standards of market conduct.
6 Customers' interests
A firm must pay due regard to the 
interests of its customers and treat 
them fairly.
7 Communications with clients
A firm must pay due regard to the 
information needs of its clients, and 
communicate information to them in 
a way which is clear, fair and not 
misleading.
8 Conflicts of interest
A firm must manage conflicts of 
interest fairly, both between itself and 
its customers and between a 
customer and another client.
9 Customers: relationships of trust
A firm must take reasonable care to 
ensure the suitability of its advice 
and discretionary decisions for any 
customer who is entitled to rely upon 
its judgment.
10 Clients' assets
A firm must arrange adequate 
protection for clients' assets when it 
is responsible for them.
11 Relations with regulators
A firm must deal with its regulators in 
an open and cooperative way, and 
must disclose to the FCA 
appropriately anything relating to the 
firm of which that regulator would 
reasonably expect notice.
12 Consumer Duty
A firm must act to deliver good 
outcomes for retail customers.

[PAGE 15]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
.
.

[PAGE 16]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
.
.
.
.
.
CHAPTER
PRIN 2A The Consumer Duty
PRIN 2A The Consumer Duty

[PAGE 17]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
Section : PRIN 2A.1 Application and purpose
Application
PRIN 2A.1.1R
References in PRIN to the obligations on firms under Principle 12 include the obligations 
imposed by rules in PRIN 2A.
PRIN 2A.1.2R
References in PRIN to obligations imposed on firms under PRIN 2A include the obligation 
imposed by Principle 12.
PRIN 2A.1.3G
The application of Principle 12 and PRIN 2A is set out in PRIN 3, including PRIN 3.2.6R to 
PRIN 3.2.12G. Principle 12 applies in relation to a firm’s retail market business or where the 
firm communicates or approves financial promotions which are addressed to, or 
disseminated in such a way that they are likely to be received by, a retail customer. To the 
extent that Principle 12 applies, Principles 6 and 7 do not apply.
PRIN 2A.1.4G
The definition of a product for the purposes of Principle 12 and PRIN 2A includes both 
products and services.
PRIN 2A.1.5G
The definition of a retail customer for the purposes of Principle 12 and PRIN 2A includes a 
prospective customer.
PRIN 2A.1.6G
The rules in Principle 12 and PRIN 2A are to be interpreted in accordance with the standard 
that could reasonably be expected of a prudent firm carrying on the same activity in relation 
to the same product and taking appropriate account of the needs and characteristics of retail 
customers as set out in PRIN 2A.7.1R. Further guidance about what can reasonably be 
expected and the needs and characteristics of retail customers is set out at PRIN 2A.7.2G 
to 2A.7.5G.
PRIN 2A.1.7R
References in this chapter (including those within Glossary definitions used in this chapter) 
to regulated activities include payment services and issuing electronic money (whether or 
not the activity of issuing electronic money specified in article 9B of the Regulated Activities 
Order); and unless otherwise stated are to be taken to include activities connected to the 
provision of payment services and to the issuing of electronic money (whether or not the 
activity of issuing electronic money specified in article 9B of the Regulated Activities Order).
Purpose
PRIN 2A.1.8G
Principle 12 reflects a general expectation by the FCA that firms should conduct their 
business to a standard which ensures an appropriate level of protection for retail customers.
While recognising the general principle that consumers should take responsibility for their 
decisions, having regard to the other factors set out in s.1C of the Act, it is appropriate to 
require a high level of protection for retail customers for reasons including:
PRIN 2A.1.9G

[PAGE 18]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
(1) that they typically face a weak bargaining position in their relationships with firms;
(2) that they are susceptible to cognitive and behavioural biases;
(3) that they may lack experience or expertise in relation to products offered through 
retail market business; and
(4) that there are frequently information asymmetries involved in retail market 
business.
PRIN 2A.1.10G
(1) The cross-cutting obligations at PRIN 2A.2 set out the overarching conduct which 
firms must demonstrate when they act to deliver good outcomes for retail customers.
(2) The main elements of firms’ conduct obligations under Principle 12 and PRIN 2A 
are set out in PRIN 2A.3 to PRIN 2A.11.
(3) The retail customer outcome rules and guidance at PRIN 2A.3 to PRIN 2A.6 set 
out firms’ key obligations in relation to product governance, price and value, 
consumer understanding and supporting consumers.
(4) There are particular provisions concerning closed products and existing products 
distributed to retail customers before 31 July 2023 in PRIN 2A.3 and PRIN 2A.4.
PRIN 2A.1.11G
Principle 12 does not change the nature of a firm’s relationship with any given retail 
customer. In particular, it does not create a fiduciary relationship where one would not 
otherwise exist nor require a firm to provide advice or carry out any other regulated activity 
where it would not otherwise have done so.
PRIN 2A.1.12G
The FCA has issued guidance on the Consumer Duty in FG22/5, which firms should read 
alongside Principle 12 and PRIN 2A as a guide to the FCA’s view as to how Principle 12 
and PRIN 2A might be complied with.
Guidance on responsibilities of firms in a product’s distribution chain
PRIN 2A.1.13G
(1) Principle 12 imposes obligations on firms towards retail customers of products 
irrespective of whether the customer is a client of the firm.
(2) This extended application aims to ensure the effectiveness of obligations under 
Principle 12 which may properly relate to activities which determine or materially 
influence retail customer outcomes carried out by a firm with whom the retail 
customer is not in a client relationship.
(3) A firm’s role in the distribution chain may mean it is unable to determine or 
materially influence retail customer outcomes in connection with the product. If so, 
the firm may not be subject to any obligation under Principle 12.
PRIN 2A.1.14G
Obligations on firms in the distribution chain of a product must be interpreted reasonably, in 
a manner that reflects the firm’s role in that distribution chain and the degree to which it can 
determine or materially influence retail customer outcomes.
The extent of a firm’s responsibilities under Principle 12 in any one case will turn on the 
PRIN 2A.1.15G

[PAGE 19]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
substance of the firm’s role in the arrangements relating to the product. A firm which 
determines or has a material influence over retail customer outcomes is accountable 
notwithstanding that the retail customer may not be its client due to the indirect nature of 
their relationship.
PRIN 2A.1.15AG
For example, where a firm’s sole activity subject to obligations under Principle 12 is 
communicating or approving a financial promotion, the rules and guidance in PRIN 2A.3 
(products and services), PRIN 2A.4 (price and value), PRIN 2A.6 (customer support) and 
PRIN 2A.11 (sale and purchase of product books) are likely to have limited relevance.
Relevance of guidance about Principles 6 and 7
PRIN 2A.1.16G
Given the high-level nature and breadth of application of the Principles, guidance about a 
Principle cannot exhaustively cover its implications (see also PRIN 1.1.9G).
PRIN 2A.1.17G
(1) In general terms, Principle 12 and PRIN 2A impose a higher and more exacting 
standard of conduct in relation to a firm’s activities relative to what Principles 6 or 7 
would have otherwise required. Principle 12 and PRIN 2A also have a broader 
application in relation to a firm’s activities relative to Principles 6 and 7, with a greater 
focus on consumer protection outcomes for retail customers, including where those 
retail customers do not stand in a client relationship with that firm in the distribution 
chain.
(2) While existing, formal guidance on Principles 6 and 7 will remain relevant to firms 
in considering their obligations under Principle 12, firms should also take due account 
of the inherent limits of such guidance in light of the factors in (1). See also PRIN 
2A.1.3G.
(3) To the extent that a firm is not acting in accordance with existing guidance on 
Principles 6 and 7 and the behaviour would amount to a breach of Principle 6 or 7 in 
the event that they had continued to apply, the behaviour is likely to amount to a 
breach of Principle 12.
(4) Where a firm is acting in accordance with guidance on Principles 6 and 7 that 
should not be relied on alone in considering how to comply with Principle 12. Firms 
also need to consider all their obligations not only under the Principles, but under any 
other applicable law, including other FCA rules such as those expanding upon 
Principle 12 as set out in PRIN 2A.
PRIN 2A.1.18G
The effect of PRIN 3.2.10R is that the application of Principles 6 and 7 is unchanged with 
respect to a firm’s activities insofar as they are not subject to Principle 12.

[PAGE 20]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
Section : PRIN 2A.2 Cross-cutting obligations
Act in good faith
PRIN 2A.2.1R
A firm must act in good faith towards retail customers.
PRIN 2A.2.2R
Acting in good faith is a standard of conduct characterised by honesty, fair and open dealing 
and acting consistently with the reasonable expectations of retail customers.
PRIN 2A.2.3G
Examples of where a firm is not acting in good faith would include:
(a) failing to take account of retail customers’ interests, for example in the way it 
designs a product or presents information;
(b) seeking inappropriately to manipulate or exploit retail customers, for example by 
manipulating or exploiting their emotions or behavioural biases to mis-lead or create 
a demand for a product;
(c) taking advantage of a retail customer or their circumstances, for example any 
characteristics of vulnerability, in a manner which is likely to cause detriment;
(d) carrying out the same activity to a higher standard or more quickly when it 
benefits the firm than when it benefits the retail customer, without objective 
justification.
PRIN 2A.2.4G
Acting in good faith does not mean a firm is prevented from pursuing legitimate commercial 
interests or seeking a profit, provided it does so in a manner which is compliant with 
Principle 12 and PRIN 2A. Acting in good faith does not require a firm to act in a fiduciary 
capacity where it was not already obliged to do so.
PRIN 2A.2.5R
If a firm identifies through complaints, its internal monitoring or from any other source, that 
retail customers have suffered foreseeable harm as a result of acts or omissions by the firm, 
it must act in good faith and take appropriate action to rectify the situation, including 
providing redress where appropriate.
[Note: PRIN 2A.10 contains rules which are relevant when a firm is considering what 
“appropriate action” it must take.]
PRIN 2A.2.6R
PRIN 2A.2.5 does not apply where the harm identified was caused by risks inherent in a 
product, provided the firm reasonably believed that retail customers or the relevant retail 
customer (as the context requires) understood and accepted those risks.
PRIN 2A.2.7G
Whether such a belief is reasonable will depend (among other things) on the nature of the 
product offered by the firm; the adequacy of the firm’s product design, communications and 
customer services; the needs and characteristics of retail customers or the relevant retail 
customer (as the context requires); and the extent to which the firm is compliant with 
applicable law in relation to the sale of that product, including the rules set out in PRIN 2A.

[PAGE 21]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
Avoid causing foreseeable harm
PRIN 2A.2.8R
A firm must avoid causing foreseeable harm to retail customers.
PRIN 2A.2.9R
Foreseeable harm may be caused by both act and omission, in a firm’s direct relationship 
with a retail customer or through its role in the distribution chain even where another firm in 
that chain also contributes to the harm.
PRIN 2A.2.10G
Avoiding causing foreseeable harm to retail customers includes:
(1) ensuring all aspects of the design, terms, marketing, sale of and support for its 
products avoid causing foreseeable harm;
(2) ensuring that no aspect of its business involves unfairly exploiting behavioural 
biases displayed or characteristics of vulnerability held by retail customers;
(3) identifying the potential for harm that might arise if it withdraws a product, its 
products change or its understanding about the impact on retail customers changes;
(4) responding to emerging trends that identify new sources of harm, including FCA 
supervisory action and/or communications; and
(5) taking appropriate action to mitigate the risk of actual or foreseeable harm, 
including for example by:
(i) updating or otherwise amending the design of the product or distribution 
strategy;
(ii) updating information about a product or updating investment advice;
(iii) ensuring that retail customers do not face unreasonable barriers (including 
unreasonable additional costs), for example when they want to switch 
products or providers or to complain;
(iv) allowing time and support for retail customers to find suitable alternatives 
where a product is withdrawn.
PRIN 2A.2.11G
A firm with an ongoing relationship with a retail customer in relation to a product would need 
to act to avoid causing foreseeable harm to that customer throughout the lifecycle of that 
product.
PRIN 2A.2.12G
A firm which is involved with the provision of a product at a point in time and without an 
ongoing relationship with the retail customer does not need to act to avoid causing harm 
which only later becomes foreseeable.
Avoiding causing foreseeable harm to retail customers does not mean a firm has a 
responsibility to prevent all harm. For example:
(1) a product may have inherent risks which retail customers accept by selecting that 
product. Where a firm reasonably believes a retail customer understands and 
accepts such risks, it will not breach the rule if it fails to prevent them;
(2) whether such a belief is reasonable will depend (among other things) on the 
nature of the product offered by the firm, the adequacy of the firm’s product design, 
PRIN 2A.2.13G

[PAGE 22]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
communications and customer services; and the extent to which it is compliant with 
applicable law in relation to the sale of that product, including the rules set out in 
PRIN 2A; and
(3) examples of risks which are inherent to a product include that a mortgage carries 
a risk of repossession and most investments carry a risk that the market may move 
resulting in capital loss.
Enable and support retail customers
PRIN 2A.2.14R
A firm must enable and support retail customers to pursue their financial objectives.
PRIN 2A.2.15G
The conclusions a firm can properly reach about the financial objectives of retail customers 
will depend on the type of product it provides.
PRIN 2A.2.16G
A firm which provides an execution-only service or a non-advised service can assume 
(unless it knows or could reasonably be expected to have known otherwise) that the 
financial objectives of retail customers are to purchase, use and enjoy the full benefits of the 
product in question.
PRIN 2A.2.17G
A firm which provides advisory or discretionary services is entitled to rely on the objectives 
that retail customers have disclosed unless it knows or could reasonably be expected to 
know that information disclosed is manifestly out of date, inaccurate or incomplete.
PRIN 2A.2.18G
Information a firm must obtain under a provision of law (including, but not limited to, 
information required by COBS 9.2.1R, COBS 9A.2.1R, COBS 10.2.1R, COBS 10A.2.1R, 
ICOBS 5.2.2R, MCOB 4.7A.6 R, MCOB 11.6.2R and CONC 5.2A.5R) is relevant to whether 
a firm knew or could reasonably be expected to know that a customer has different financial 
objectives for the purposes of PRIN 2A.2.16G and PRIN 2A.2.17G.
PRIN 2A.2.19G
To the extent that a firm becomes aware or should reasonably have become aware of a 
specific financial objective sought by a retail customer in connection with a product, it should 
consider how to support progress towards achieving that objective in its interactions with 
that retail customer.
PRIN 2A.2.20G
Enabling and supporting retail customers to pursue their financial objectives includes acting 
to empower retail customers to make good choices in their interests, including by:
(1) ensuring all aspects of the design, terms, marketing, sale of and support for its 
products meet and not frustrate the objectives and interests of retail customers;
(2) making sure retail customers have the information and support they need, when 
they need it, to make and act on informed decisions;
(3) enabling retail customers to enjoy the use of their product and to switch or exit the 
product where they want to without unreasonable barriers or delay; and
(4) taking account of retail customers’ behavioural biases and the impact of 
characteristics of vulnerability in all aspects of customer interaction.

[PAGE 23]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
PRIN 2A.2.21G
Enabling and supporting retail customers to pursue their financial objectives may include the 
proactive provision of information or offer of support when a firm declines to provide a 
particular product to a retail customer. In particular:
(1) firms should consider in light of the financial objectives of that retail customer 
whether it would be appropriate to provide information to enable and support that 
retail customer to achieve those objectives, and where appropriate should provide it; 
and
(2) they should take reasonable steps to ensure any information they provide to a 
retail customer which is produced by an external third party such as a money advice 
charity, to which the retail customer is signposted, is independent and reliable.
PRIN 2A.2.22G
Enabling and supporting retail customers to pursue their financial objectives does not mean 
that a firm is expected to go beyond what a prudent firm carrying out the same activity in 
relation to the same product, taking appropriate account of the needs and characteristics of 
retail customers, including in particular as set out in PRIN 2A.7.4G to PRIN 2A.7.5G, would 
do. For example, it does not require firms to go beyond what is reasonably expected by 
retail customers in the delivery of the product.
Guidance on the cross-cutting obligations
PRIN 2A.2.23G
(1) The obligations in PRIN 2A.2 apply at all stages of the customer journey and 
during the whole lifecycle of a product. Firms will therefore need to keep products 
under regular review and consider the impact of any changes they make to those 
products.
(2) In applying the obligations in PRIN 2A.2, firms should note that each of the cross-
cutting obligations in this section requires firms to act both proactively and reactively, 
as the context requires.
PRIN 2A.2.24G
The obligations in PRIN 2A.2 apply both at a target market and (where context requires) at 
an individual customer level, for example:
(1) Where a firm interacts with an individual retail customer or is providing a bespoke 
service the obligations in PRIN 2A.2 apply to those interactions and that service;
(2) Where a firm is not interacting with an individual retail customer, for example in 
the design of a product, when making pricing decisions or designing communications, 
the obligations in PRIN 2A.2 apply at the level of that target market.
PRIN 2A.2.25G
Each of the cross-cutting obligations in this section requires firms to understand and take 
account of cognitive and behavioural biases and the impact of characteristics of vulnerability 
and/or lack of knowledge on retail customers’ needs and decisions.
Interaction between Principle 12 and the cross-cutting obligations
PRIN 2A.2.26R
The cross-cutting obligations (the rules in PRIN 2A.2) exhaust what is required under 
Principle 12.

[PAGE 24]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
PRIN 2A.2.27G
The cross-cutting obligations define how firms should act to deliver good outcomes for retail 
customers.
Interaction between the cross-cutting obligations and the outcomes 
rules
PRIN 2A.2.28G
The outcomes rules at PRIN 2A.3 to PRIN 2A.6 help to define what is required by Principle 
12 and PRIN 2A.2 but do not exhaust those rules.

[PAGE 25]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
Section : PRIN 2A.3 Consumer Duty: retail customer outcome - products and services
General nature of product governance obligations
PRIN 2A.3.1G
The product governance obligations on firms under Principle 12 are general in nature and 
should be considered alongside any other legal or regulatory obligations that may apply, for 
example any marketing restrictions in relation to the product.
Manufacturer product governance arrangements
PRIN 2A.3.2R
A manufacturer must maintain, operate and review a process for the approval of:
(1) a product; and
(2) significant adaptations of a product,
in each case before it is marketed or distributed to retail customers.
PRIN 2A.3.3G
PRIN 2A.3.2R includes any product which is a new product manufactured on or after 31 July 
2023, or an existing product. In relation to an existing product “marketing” or “distributing” 
includes reference to any future activity regardless of whether the product has previously 
been made available for marketing or distribution.
Manufacturers: product approval process for products that are not 
closed products
PRIN 2A.3.4R
For each product that is not a closed product, a manufacturer’s product approval procedures 
must:
(1) specify the target market for the product at a sufficiently granular level, taking into 
account the characteristics, risk profile, complexity and nature of the product;
(2) take account of any particular additional or different needs, characteristics and 
objectives that might be relevant for retail customers in the target market with 
characteristics of vulnerability;
(3) ensure that all relevant risks to the target market, including any relevant risks to 
retail customers with characteristics of vulnerability, are assessed;
(4) ensure that the design of the product:
(i) meets the needs, characteristics and objectives of the target market;
(ii) does not adversely affect groups of retail customers in the target market, 
including groups of retail customers with characteristics of vulnerability; and
(iii) avoids causing foreseeable harm in the target market;
(5) ensure that the intended distribution strategy is appropriate for the target market; 
and
(6) require the manufacturer to take all reasonable steps to ensure that the product is 
distributed to the identified target market.
Manufacturers: product approval process for closed products
(1) A manufacturer of a closed product must maintain, operate and review a process 
PRIN 2A.3.5R

[PAGE 26]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
to assess and regularly review whether any aspect of the product results in the firm 
not complying with the cross-cutting obligations (PRIN 2A.2) in relation to existing 
retail customers.
(2) The manufacturer’s process in (1) does not have to comply with PRIN 2A.3.2R, 
PRIN 2A.3.4R, PRIN 2A.3.7R, PRIN 2A.3.9R, PRIN 2A.3.10R, PRIN 2A.3.11R or 
PRIN 2A.3.12R.
PRIN 2A.3.6R
The manufacturer’s process must also assess and regularly review whether the closed 
product affects groups of retail customers in different ways and in particular whether any 
retail customers in the target market with characteristics of vulnerability are adversely 
affected by any aspect of the product.
Manufacturer: review
PRIN 2A.3.7R
A manufacturer must regularly review its products taking into account any event that could 
materially affect the potential risk to the target market. In doing so, the manufacturer must 
assess at least the following:
(1) whether the product meets the identified needs, characteristics and objectives of 
the target market, including identified needs, characteristics and objectives of retail 
customers in the target market with characteristics of vulnerability; and
(2) whether the intended distribution strategy remains appropriate, including whether 
the product is being distributed to the target market or reaching retail customers 
outside the target market.
Manufacturer: action following review of products
PRIN 2A.3.8R
Where a manufacturer identifies any circumstances related to the product that may 
adversely affect retail customers, the manufacturer must:
(1) take appropriate action to mitigate the situation and prevent any further harm; and
(2) where appropriate, promptly inform other relevant persons in the distribution chain 
about the circumstances that led to action being taken and the remedial action taken.
Manufacturers: testing products
PRIN 2A.3.9R
(1) Manufacturers must test their products appropriately, including scenario analyses 
where relevant.
(2) A manufacturer must, as part of discharging its obligations in (1), assess whether 
the product meets the identified needs, characteristics and objectives of the target 
market, including identified needs, characteristics and objectives of retail customers 
in the target market with characteristics of vulnerability.
(3) Manufacturers must test their products in a qualitative manner and, depending on 
the type and nature of the product and the related risk of detriment to retail 
customers, quantitative manner.
If the results of the testing show that the product does not meet the identified needs, 
PRIN 2A.3.10R

[PAGE 27]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
characteristics and objectives of the target market, including identified needs, characteristics 
and objectives of any group or groups of retail customers in the target market with 
characteristics of vulnerability:
(1) in relation to a new product or a significant adaptation of an existing product, the 
manufacturer must not bring the new or adapted product to the market;
(2) in relation to an existing product, it must immediately:
(a) cease marketing or distributing the product (whether directly or indirectly);
(b) cease any renewals for existing retail customers, provided that existing 
retail customers are easily able to move to an alternative product that provides 
at least the same level of benefit at an equivalent cost to the customer, 
whether with the firm or with another firm; and
(c) (where the firm intends to continue to market and distribute the product), 
make such changes as are necessary for the product to meet the identified 
needs, characteristics and objectives of the target market, including identified 
needs, characteristics and objectives of any group or groups of retail 
customers in the target market with characteristics of vulnerability.
Manufacturers: collaborating on manufacture
PRIN 2A.3.11R
Where firms collaborate to manufacture a product, they must set out in a written agreement 
their respective roles and responsibilities in the product approval process in PRIN 2A.3.
Manufacturer: selecting distribution channels and providing 
information to distributors
PRIN 2A.3.12R
(1) A manufacturer must select distribution channels that are appropriate for the 
target market.
(2) A manufacturer must provide each distributor with adequate information in good 
time to enable it to comply with the rules applicable to it in this section.
(3) The information to be made available under (2) includes all appropriate 
information regarding the product and the product approval process from time to time 
to enable the distributor to comply with PRIN 2A.3.16R.
PRIN 2A.3.12AG
A manufacturer that is a manager is reminded of its obligations under ESG 4.1.8R and ESG 
5.2.9R in meeting its obligations under PRIN 2A.3.12R.
Distributors: unregulated manufacturer
PRIN 2A.3.13R
Where a distributor distributes a product manufactured by a person to whom the rules in 
PRIN 2A.3 do not apply, it must take all reasonable steps to comply with PRIN 2A.3.14R to 
2A.3.23G.
Distributor: distribution arrangements
A distributor must maintain, operate and review product distribution arrangements for each 
product it distributes that:
PRIN 2A.3.14R

[PAGE 28]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
(1) avoid causing and, where that is not practical, mitigates foreseeable harm to retail 
customers;
(2) support a proper management of conflicts of interest; and
(3) ensure the needs, characteristics and objectives of the target market are duly 
taken into account.
PRIN 2A.3.15G
PRIN 2A.3.14R includes any product whether a new product distributed on or after 31 July 
2023, or an existing product. In relation to an existing product, “distributes” includes 
reference to any future distribution activity regardless of whether the product has previously 
been made available for distribution, for example, renewing a contract with an existing retail 
customer.
Distributors: obtaining information from manufacturers
PRIN 2A.3.16R
A distributor must ensure that the product distribution arrangements contain effective 
measures and procedures to obtain sufficient, adequate and reliable information from the 
manufacturer about the product to:
(1) understand the characteristics of the product;
(2) understand the identified target market;
(3) consider the needs, characteristics and objectives of any retail customers in the 
target market with characteristics of vulnerability;
(4) identify the intended distribution strategy for the product; and
(5) ensure the product will be distributed in accordance with the needs, 
characteristics and objectives of the target market.
PRIN 2A.3.16AG
A distributor is reminded of its obligations under ESG 4.1.16R to ESG 4.1.19R in meeting its 
obligations under PRIN 2A.3.16R.
Distributors: specific distribution strategy
PRIN 2A.3.17R
(1) This rule applies where a distributor sets up or implements a specific distribution 
strategy to supplement the manufacturer’s strategy under PRIN 2A.3.4R(5).
(2) Any strategy set up or implemented by a distributor must be consistent with:
(a) the manufacturer’s intended distribution strategy; and
(b) the identified target market.
Distributors: providing sales information to manufacturers
PRIN 2A.3.18R
To support product reviews carried out by manufacturers, a distributor must, upon request, 
provide manufacturers with relevant information including, where appropriate, sales 
information and information on the regular reviews of the product distribution arrangements.
Distributors: review
(1) A distributor must regularly review its distribution arrangements to ensure that 
PRIN 2A.3.19R

[PAGE 29]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
they are still appropriate and up to date.
(2) When reviewing the distribution arrangements, a distributor must verify that it is 
only distributing each product to the identified target market.
Distributor: action following review of products
PRIN 2A.3.20R
Where a distributor identifies an issue following a review, it must:
(1) make appropriate amendments to the product distribution arrangements;
(2) where harm has been identified, take appropriate action to mitigate the situation 
and prevent any further harm; and
(3) promptly inform all relevant persons in the distribution chain about any action 
taken.
Vested rights
PRIN 2A.3.21R
Where a product has existing contracts entered into before 31 July 2023, unless the firm 
has identified a breach of rules in force at the time, the appropriate action a firm must take 
under PRIN 2A.3.8R or PRIN 2A.3.20R does not require a firm to waive its vested rights 
under those existing contracts.
PRIN 2A.3.22G
For the purposes of PRIN 2A.3.21R, vested rights are likely to include the following:
(1) payments already due under the terms of the contract;
(2) remuneration for services wholly or partly provided under the contract; and
(3) contractual charges payable on early termination of the contract.
PRIN 2A.3.23G
Whether a right is a vested right or not will depend on all the facts of the case and 
interpretation of the relevant contract.
Application of the product governance outcome
PRIN 2A.3.24R
PRIN 2A.3 does not apply to: 
(1) any firm subject to  PROD 3, PROD 4, or PROD 7 for any product they 
manufacture or distribute that falls within the scope of the relevant PROD chapter; or
(2) a bespoke insurance contract within the meaning of PROD 1.4.3-CR.
PRIN 2A.3.25G
Products within scope of PROD include any product significantly adapted since the relevant 
PROD rules came into force, legacy non-investment insurance products and funeral plans 
which were existing products as of 29 July 2022.
PRIN 2A.3.26R
A closed product not already subject to PROD must follow the closed product rules set out 
in PRIN 2A.3.5R to PRIN 2A.3.6R and 2A.3.21R to PRIN 2A.3.23G.
A closed product will already be subject to PROD if it is:
(1) a financial instrument or structured deposit manufactured by a firm subject to 
PRIN 2A.3.27G

[PAGE 30]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
PROD 3 on or after 3 January 2018;
(2) an insurance product manufactured on or after 1 October 2018 or a legacy non-
investment insurance product; or
(3) a funeral plan product manufactured on or after 29 July 2022.
PRIN 2A.3.28R
PRIN 2A.3 does not apply to both:
(1) units in an authorised fund or the sub-fund of such a scheme, where the relevant 
authorised fund or sub-fund is in the process of winding up or termination under, or in 
accordance with, COLL 7.3, COLL 7.4, or COLL 7.4A; and
(2) units or shares in a fund or sub-fund which is not an authorised fund or a sub-fund 
of such a scheme or AIF, where the relevant fund or sub-fund is in a process of 
winding up or termination which is equivalent to that referred to in (1).
Compliance with other Handbook provisions
PRIN 2A.3.29G
A firm which either:
(1) conducts business in relation to products that would be covered by chapters in 
PROD if they were manufactured after the date the relevant chapter in PROD came 
into force; or
(2) is subject to PROD 1.3.2R,
may choose whether to apply either the processes set out in the relevant chapter of PROD 
that applies to the product (PROD 3 for financial instruments and structured deposits and 
PROD 4 for insurance products) or the processes set out in PRIN 2A.3. PRIN 2A.3.30E sets 
out the circumstances where a firm that chooses to comply with the relevant chapter of 
PROD is likely to be considered in breach of PRIN 2A.3.
PRIN 2A.3.30E
(1) This provision applies to:
(a) any firm to which PROD 1.3.2R applies;
(b) a manufacturer of an existing product manufactured before 3 January 
2018, which is a financial instrument or a structured deposit; and
(c) a manufacturer of an existing product manufactured before 1 October 2018 
which is an insurance product, but which is not a legacy non-investment 
insurance product.
(2) For firms within (1)(a) or (b), where the firm is following the provisions of PROD 3, 
contravention of PROD 3 may be relied on as tending to establish contravention of 
those provisions of PRIN 2A.3 that apply to the firm.
(3) For firms within (1)(c), where the firm is following the provisions of PROD 4, 
contravention of PROD 4 may be relied on as tending to establish contravention of 
those provisions of PRIN 2A.3 that apply to the firm.

[PAGE 31]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
Section : PRIN 2A.4 Consumer Duty: retail customer outcome on price and value
What is value?
PRIN 2A.4.1R
For the purposes of this outcome:
(1) value is the relationship between the amount paid by a retail customer for the 
product and the benefits they can reasonably expect to get from the product; and
(2) a product provides fair value where the amount paid for the product is reasonable 
relative to the benefits of the product.
Price and value: manufacturers general obligation
PRIN 2A.4.2R
A manufacturer must:
(1) ensure that its products provide fair value to retail customers in the target markets 
for those products; and
(2) carry out a value assessment of its products and review that assessment on a 
regular basis appropriate to the nature and duration of the product.
PRIN 2A.4.3R
An initial value assessment must be carried out for:
(1) a product; and
(2) any significant adaptation of a product,
in each case before it is marketed or distributed to a retail customer.
PRIN 2A.4.4G
PRIN 2A.4.2R and PRIN 2A.4.3R include any product whether a new product manufactured 
on or after 31 July 2023, an existing product or a closed product. In relation to an existing 
product or a closed product, “marketing” or “distributing” includes reference to any future 
activity regardless of whether the product has previously been made available for marketing 
or distribution.
PRIN 2A.4.5R
In ensuring that a product provides fair value, a manufacturer must be satisfied that this will 
be the case from the point at which the manufacturer completes the assessment for a 
reasonably foreseeable period, including, where the product is one that renews, following 
renewal.
PRIN 2A.4.6G
What constitutes a ‘reasonably foreseeable period’ will depend on the type of product. This 
could include the expected length of time a retail customer in the target market will keep it, 
including, where relevant, the number of occasions the firm would reasonably expect that a 
retail customer would renew the product.
Product packages
Where a product is intended to be provided with one or more other products, a manufacturer 
must ensure that:
(1) each component product; and
PRIN 2A.4.7R

[PAGE 32]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
(2) the package as a whole,
provides fair value to retail customers in the target market.
The value assessment
PRIN 2A.4.8R
A manufacturer’s assessment of whether or not a product provides fair value must include 
(but is not limited to) consideration of the following:
(1) the nature of the product, including the benefits that will be provided or may be 
reasonably expected and its quality;
(2) any limitations that are part of the product;
(3) the expected total price to be paid by the retail customer or that may become due 
from the retail customer. The expected total price includes:
(a) the price paid or agreed to be paid by the retail customer on entering into a 
contract for the product, including by way of repayments;
(b) any regular charges or fees payable over the lifetime of the product, for 
example an annual management charge;
(c) any contingent fees or charges, for example, administrative charges for 
changes of address, charges for falling into arrears on a loan, or charges for 
transferring investments; and
(d) any non-financial costs the retail customer is asked or required to provide 
to the firm; and
(4) any characteristics of vulnerability that retail customers in the target market 
display and the impact these characteristics have on the likelihood that retail 
customers may not receive fair value from its products.
Guidance on the value assessment: factors that may be considered
PRIN 2A.4.9G
A manufacturer may consider one or more of the following in its assessment of whether or 
not a product is providing fair value:
(1) the costs incurred by the firm in manufacturing or distributing the product;
(2) the market rate and charges for a comparable product;
(3) any accrued costs and/or benefits for existing or closed products; and
(4) whether there are any products that are priced significantly lower for a similar or 
better benefit.
Guidance on the value assessment: benefits and costs
PRIN 2A.4.10G
(1) The types of benefits that retail customers may reasonably expect to obtain may 
include non-financial benefits such as an enhanced level of customer service 
providing extra assistance to retail customers in using the product.
(2) Examples of non-financial costs include the provision of personal data and the 
granting of permission to use that data.
Guidance on the value assessment: characteristics of retail customers

[PAGE 33]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
PRIN 2A.4.11G
In considering the value assessment and how it applies when manufacturers have different 
groups of retail customer in their target market for a product, they should have regard in 
particular to the following:
(1) whether any retail customers who have characteristics of vulnerability may be less 
likely to receive fair value; and
(2) whether the product provides fair value for each of the different groups of retail 
customer in the target market, including in circumstances where the pricing structure 
of the product involves different prices being charged to different groups of retail 
customers.
Guidance on the value assessment: interaction with the Duty and the 
retail customer outcomes
PRIN 2A.4.12G
In ensuring that a product provides fair value, a manufacturer should have regard to how the 
cross-cutting obligations (PRIN 2A.2) and the other retail customer outcome rules (PRIN 
2A.3 to PRIN 2A.6) are met in respect of the product.
Manufacturers: collaboration with another firm or with unregulated 
persons
PRIN 2A.4.13R
Where firms collaborate to manufacture a product, they must set out in a written agreement 
their respective roles and responsibilities in the value assessment in PRIN 2A.4.
PRIN 2A.4.14R
Where a firm collaborates with a person who is not a firm to manufacture a product, it 
remains fully responsible for discharging all its obligations under PRIN 2A.4.
Manufacturers: information for distributors
PRIN 2A.4.15R
The manufacturer of a product must ensure that firms distributing the product have all 
necessary information to understand the value that the product is intended to provide to a 
retail customer.
Price and value: distributors general obligation
(1) A distributor must not distribute a product unless its distribution arrangements are 
consistent with the product providing fair value to retail customers.
(2) Arrangements will be consistent with providing fair value to retail customers where 
they enable the distributor to obtain enough information from the manufacturer to 
understand the outcome of the value assessment and in particular to identify:
(a) the benefits the product is intended to provide to a retail customer;
(b) the characteristics, objectives and needs of the target market;
(c) the interaction between the price paid by the retail customer and the extent 
and quality of any services provided by the distributor; and
(d) whether the impact that the distribution arrangements (including any 
remuneration it or (so far as the distributor is aware of it) another person in the 
distribution chain receives) would result in the product ceasing to provide fair 
PRIN 2A.4.16R

[PAGE 34]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
value to retail customers.
Distributors: unregulated manufacturer
PRIN 2A.4.17R
Where a distributor distributes a product manufactured by a person to whom the rules in 
PRIN 2A.4 do not apply, it must take all reasonable steps to comply with PRIN 2A.4.16R.
Distribution chains
PRIN 2A.4.18R
(1) A firm which distributes products to retail customers is responsible for ensuring 
the fair value obligations in relation to distribution are met in respect of any product it 
distributes to a retail customer.
(2) A firm which distributes products to other distributors must ensure that all 
information relevant to the value assessment is passed to the distributor at the end of 
the distribution chain.
(3) A firm which distributes products to other firms in the distribution chain must 
consider whether they are also a co-manufacturer of the product they are distributing 
and if they are, apply the manufacturer rules in this section.
When must a manufacturer and a distributor consider the value 
assessment?
PRIN 2A.4.19R
Manufacturers and distributors are responsible for the value assessment as follows:
(1) A manufacturer must consider the fair value assessment at every stage of the 
product approval process, including in particular when:
(a) designing the product;
(b) identifying retail customers in the target market for whom the product 
needs to provide fair value; and
(c) selecting distributions methods/channels.
(2) A distributor must consider the fair value assessment when determining the 
distribution strategy for the product and in particular where the product is to be 
distributed with another product whether as part of a package or not.
The value assessment: general
PRIN 2A.4.20R
In determining whether a product provides fair value, or distribution arrangements are 
consistent with fair value being provided, a firm must not rely on individual retail customers 
to consider whether they believe the product provides fair value in place of the firm’s own 
assessment.
Closed products
PRIN 2A.4.21R
(1) The obligation on manufacturers in PRIN 2A.4.2R to ensure that a product 
provides fair value applies to closed products as well as new and existing products.
(2) In the case of a closed product, the reference to a target market in PRIN 2A.4.2R 
should be read as referring to the retail customers who are customers of the closed 
product.

[PAGE 35]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
Guidance on the value assessment: closed and existing products
PRIN 2A.4.22G
The assessment of whether a closed product or an existing product provides fair value 
should be on a forward-looking basis only. Unless required to do so by any other rule, 
manufacturers do not need to consider whether their closed products or existing products 
provided fair value prior to these rules coming into force.
PRIN 2A.4.23G
In assessing whether a closed product or an existing product provides fair value, a 
manufacturer may take into account the benefits provided, the costs charged to the retail 
customer and the costs incurred by the firm prior to these rules coming into effect.
[Note: See also PRIN 2A.4.29R regarding appropriate action for closed products if the 
product no longer provides fair value.]
Reviewing the value assessment
PRIN 2A.4.24R
(1) A manufacturer must regularly review the value assessment throughout the life of 
the product to ensure that the product continues to provide fair value to retail 
customers in the target market.
(2) A distributor must regularly review its distribution arrangements throughout the life 
of the product to ensure that they remain consistent with the product providing fair 
value to retail customers in the target market.
PRIN 2A.4.25R
Where a manufacturer identifies in its review of its value assessment that the product no 
longer provides fair value, it must take appropriate action to:
(1) mitigate, and where appropriate, remediate any harm caused to existing retail 
customers; and
(2) prevent harm to new retail customers.
PRIN 2A.4.26R
Appropriate action under PRIN 2A.4.25R includes notifying the distributor(s) of the product 
of the issue and of any changes to the product and the distribution strategy that the 
manufacturer has put place to mitigate and prevent further harm.
PRIN 2A.4.27R
Where a distributor identifies that the product no longer provides fair value, whether that is 
due to aspects of the product or the distribution arrangements, it must take appropriate 
action to:
(1) mitigate the situation and prevent further occurrences of any possible harm to 
retail customers, including, where appropriate, amending the distribution strategy for 
that product (and, where relevant, the package);
(2) redress any foreseeable harm that has been caused to retail customers by faults 
in the distributor’s distribution arrangements; and
(3) inform any relevant manufacturers and other distributors in the chain promptly 
about any concerns they have and any action the distributor is taking.
The appropriate action that a distributor may need to take under PRIN 2A.4.27R will depend 
PRIN 2A.4.28G

[PAGE 36]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
on the role the distributor has in the distribution chain and in relation to the product being 
distributed. A distributor who is a co-manufacturer of the product being distributed is likely to 
be able to do more to mitigate the situation than distributors who are not co-manufacturers.
Vested rights
PRIN 2A.4.29R
In the case of a closed product, or an existing product held by a retail customer before 31 
July 2023, unless the firm has identified a breach of rules in existence before 31 July 2023, 
the appropriate action a firm may take does not require a firm to waive its vested contractual 
rights.
PRIN 2A.4.30G
For the purposes of PRIN 2A.4.29R, vested contractual rights include the following:
(1) payments already due under the terms of the contract;
(2) remuneration for services wholly or partly provided under the contract; and
(3) contractual charges payable on early termination of the contract.
PRIN 2A.4.31G
Whether a right is a vested right or not will depend on all the facts of the case and 
interpretation of the relevant contract.
Application of the price and value outcome
PRIN 2A.4.32R
(1)  The rules in PRIN 2A.4 do not apply to:
1. (a)
 a firm which manufactures or distributes a non-investment insurance product or a 
legacy non-investment insurance product;
2. (b)
 a firm which manufactures or distributes any funeral plan product subject to PROD 
7; and
3. (c)
 an authorised fund manager in relation to products subject to COLL 6.6.19R to 
6.6.26G, COLL 8.5.16R to 8.5.22R, or COLL 15.7.16R to 15.7.24R.
(2)
 A firm in (1) must continue to apply PROD 4 (in accordance with the application of 
PROD 1.4) and PROD 7 or the relevant COLL rules .
PRIN 2A.4.33R
PRIN 2A.4 does not apply to both:
(1) units in an authorised fund or the sub-fund of such a scheme, where the relevant 
authorised fund or sub-fund is in the process of winding up or termination under, or in 
accordance with, COLL 7.3, COLL 7.4, or COLL 7.4A; and
(2) units or shares in a fund or sub-fund which is not an authorised fund or a sub-fund 
of such a scheme or AIF, where the relevant fund or sub-fund is in a process of 
winding up or termination which is equivalent to that referred to in (1).
(1) A manufacturer of a funeral plan product which is a closed product and was 
PRIN 2A.4.34R

[PAGE 37]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
manufactured before 29 July 2022 must apply the closed product rules and guidance 
in PRIN 2A.4..
(2) The closed product rules and guidance are PRIN 2A.4.1R to 2A.4.2R, 2A.4.4G to 
2A.4.6G, 2A.4.8R to 2A.4.12G 2A.4.20R to 2A.4.25R and 2A.4.29R to 2A.4.31G.
PRIN 2A.4.35E
Where a manufacturer of a closed product which is a funeral plan product manufactured 
before 29 July 2022 is following the provisions of PROD 7 concerning the fair value of 
funeral plan products, contravention of PROD 7 may be relied on as tending to establish 
contravention of those provisions of PRIN 2A.4 that apply to the firm.
Application to pension scheme operators and providers of pathway 
investments
PRIN 2A.4.36R
(1) This rule applies to a firm that is required to comply with COBS 19.5 (Independent 
Governance Committees (IGCs) and publication and disclosure of costs and 
charges).
(2) A firm to which this rule applies must use the value for money assessment carried 
out by the IGC or the governance advisory arrangement when carrying out its value 
assessment under PRIN 2A.4.2R.
(3) Where a firm disagrees with the value for money assessment carried out by the 
IGC or the governance advisory arrangement it must:
(a) explain why it disagrees with the assessment; and
(b) set out how it considers the relevant scheme or pathway investment 
provides fair value.
(4) In setting out how it considers the relevant scheme or pathway investment 
provides fair value the firm must use the framework set out in COBS 19.5.
(5) A firm that is unable to adequately explain why it disagrees with a value for money 
assessment conducted under COBS 19.5 must apply PRIN 2A.4.25R to the relevant 
scheme or pathway investment.

[PAGE 38]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
Section : PRIN 2A.5 Consumer Duty: retail customer outcome on consumer 
understanding
Application
PRIN 2A.5.1R
(1) Other than PRIN 2A.5.15R, this section applies to:
(a) all firms to whom Principle 12 and PRIN 2A apply, involved in the 
production, approval or distribution of retail customer communications, 
regardless of whether the firm has a direct relationship with a retail customer, 
and including where a firm produces, approves or distributes financial 
promotions or other advertisements, sales-related communications, and post-
sale communications (and references to a firm’s communications or a firm 
communicating are to be read accordingly);
(b) all communications throughout a firm’s interactions with retail customers, 
including:
(i) before, during, and after any sale of a product; and
(ii) interactions that do not relate to a specific product; and
(c) all communications including verbal, visual or in writing, from a firm to a 
retail customer, regardless of the channel used or intended to be used for the 
communication, including electronic communications, such as on social 
media.
(2) PRIN 2A.5.15R applies to all firms to whom Principle 12 and PRIN 2A apply.
PRIN 2A.5.2G
Retail customers in this section means the retail customers intended to receive the 
communication.
Communications to retail customers
PRIN 2A.5.3R
(1) A firm must support retail customer understanding so that its communications:
(a) meet the information needs of retail customers;
(b) are likely to be understood by retail customers; and
(c) equip retail customers to make decisions that are effective, timely and 
properly informed.
(2) A firm must communicate information to retail customers in a way which is clear, 
fair and not misleading.
PRIN 2A.5.4R
With regard to PRIN 2A.5.3R(1):
(1) for product-specific communications, a firm should consider the target market for 
that product; or
(2) for non product-specific communications, a firm should consider its retail 
customers.
With regard to PRIN 2A.5.3R(1)(c), for a firm to provide information on a timely basis, it must 
PRIN 2A.5.5R

[PAGE 39]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
communicate in good time for retail customers to make effective decisions, including:
(1) before the purchase of a product; and
(2) at suitable points throughout the lifecycle of the product.
PRIN 2A.5.6R
In considering the methods of communicating with retail customers, a firm must satisfy itself 
that the communication channel:
(1) enables the communication of relevant information which retail customers are 
likely to need in a way that supports effective decision making; and
(2) provides an appropriate opportunity for retail customers to review the information 
and, where relevant, assess their options.
PRIN 2A.5.7G
In supporting the understanding of retail customers through its communications, a firm 
should:
(1) explain or present information in a logical manner;
(2) use plain and intelligible language and, where use of jargon or technical terms is 
unavoidable, explain the meaning of any jargon or technical terms as simply as 
possible;
(3) make key information prominent and easy to identify, including by means of 
headings and layout, display and font attributes of text, and by use of design devices 
such as tables, bullet points, graphs, graphics, audio-visuals and interactive media;
(4) avoid unnecessary disclaimers; and
(5) provide relevant information with an appropriate level of detail, to avoid providing 
too much information such that it may prevent retail customers from making effective 
decisions.
PRIN 2A.5.8R
In supporting the understanding of retail customers, the firm must tailor communications 
provided to retail customers, taking into account:
(1) the characteristics of retail customers, including any characteristics of 
vulnerability;
(2) the complexity of the product;
(3) the communication channel(s) used; and
(4) the role of the firm, including whether the firm is providing regulated advice or 
information only.
Interacting on a one-to-one basis
When a firm is interacting directly with a retail customer on a one-to-one basis, such as in 
branch, during a telephone conversation or other interactive dialogue, the firm must, where 
appropriate:
(1) tailor the communication to meet the information needs of that retail customer, 
taking into account whether they have characteristics of vulnerability; and
(2) ask the retail customer whether they understand the information and if they have 
PRIN 2A.5.9R

[PAGE 40]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
any further questions, particularly if the information is reasonably regarded as key 
information, such as where it prompts that retail customer to make a decision.
Testing, monitoring and adapting communications
PRIN 2A.5.10R
(1) Where appropriate, a firm must:
(a) test communications before communicating them to retail customers; and
(b) (as set out in PRIN 2A.9) regularly monitor the impact of the 
communications once they have been communicated,
to identify whether they are supporting good outcomes for retail customers.
(2) Where a firm has identified any issues in its communications through PRIN 
2A.5.10R(1), it must:
(a) investigate the issue;
(b) correct any deficiencies through:
(i) adapting its communications; and
(ii) (where appropriate) adapting its products or processes, for example 
its sales processes, if it is aware or ought to reasonably be aware that 
adapting its communications would not be sufficient in isolation to 
support good outcomes for retail customers; and
(c) (where appropriate) follow the requirements in relation to remedies and 
other action in PRIN 2A.2.5R and PRIN 2A.10.
PRIN 2A.5.11G
With regard to the firm’s role, it would be more appropriate for the firm to:
(1) test communications if the firm is or ought to reasonably be responsible for:
(a) the production of those communications; or
(b) adapting those communications after testing; and
(2) monitor the impact of communications where the firm has direct interactions with 
retail customers, such as through the provision of customer services (whether 
outsourced in whole or in part).
In determining whether testing of a communication is appropriate, a firm should consider 
factors such as:
(1) the purpose of the communication and, in particular, if it is designed to prompt or 
inform a decision, and the relative importance of that decision;
(2) the context of the communication, its timing, and its frequency (for example, it is 
likely to be more appropriate to test communications that could impact many retail 
customers);
(3) the information needs of retail customers;
(4) the characteristics of vulnerability of retail customers;
(5) whether the scope for harm to retail customers is likely to be significant, including 
if the information being conveyed were misunderstood or overlooked by retail 
customers; and
PRIN 2A.5.12G

[PAGE 41]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
(6) whether, to support good outcomes for retail customers, it is more important to 
communicate information urgently, rather than carrying out testing beforehand.
PRIN 2A.5.13G
(1) A firm should adapt its communications in accordance with PRIN 
2A.5.10R(2)(b)(i) to support retail customer understanding if it identifies that:
(a) there are areas of common misunderstanding among retail customers; or
(b) retail customers are not experiencing good outcomes, including particular 
groups of retail customers such as those with characteristics of vulnerability.
(2) For the purposes of PRIN 2A.5.13G(1)(a), if there is a notably different response 
by retail customers than was reasonably anticipated by the firm or ought to have 
been reasonably anticipated, including a notably lower response rate, following a 
communication prompting retail customers to take action, then this would suggest 
that the communication has not been understood.
PRIN 2A.5.14R
Where a firm identifies or becomes aware of a communication produced by another firm in 
its distribution chain that is not delivering good outcomes for retail customers, it must 
promptly notify the issue to the relevant firm in the distribution chain, such as a 
manufacturer.
Providing information to other firms
PRIN 2A.5.15R
A firm must provide information in good time to another firm in the same distribution chain, 
where such information is:
(1) requested by the other firm and is reasonably required; or
(2) otherwise considered to be reasonably required by the firm,
so that it can be communicated to retail customers.

[PAGE 42]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
Section : PRIN 2A.6 Consumer Duty: retail customer outcome on consumer support
Application
PRIN 2A.6.1R
(1) Other than in PRIN 2A.6.6R, this section applies:
(a) to all firms to whom Principle 12 and PRIN 2A apply, who are responsible 
for interacting directly with, and providing support to, retail customers, such as 
through its customer services functions and including where the firm 
outsources its interactions with retail customers to a third party (in whole or 
part);
(b) regardless of the channel used or intended to be used when interacting 
with, or providing support to, retail customers, including via electronic 
communications such as on social media; and
(c) to all support provided by a firm to retail customers, such as in the course 
of or in connection with the firm providing customer services, including:
(i) before, during, and after any sale of a product; and
(ii) support that does not relate to a specific product.
(2) PRIN 2A.6.6R applies to all firms to whom Principle 12 and PRIN 2A apply.
Design and delivery of customer support
PRIN 2A.6.2R
A firm must design and deliver support to retail customers such that it:
(1) meets the needs of retail customers, including those with characteristics of 
vulnerability;
(2) ensures that retail customers can use their product as reasonably anticipated;
(3) ensures that it includes appropriate friction in its customer journeys to mitigate the 
risk of harm and give retail customers sufficient opportunity to understand and assess 
their options, including any risks; and
(4) ensures that retail customers do not face unreasonable barriers (including 
unreasonable additional costs) during the lifecycle of a product, such as when they 
want to:
(a) make general enquiries or requests to the firm;
(b) amend or switch the product;
(c) transfer to a new product provider;
(d) access a benefit which the product is intended to provide;
(e) submit a claim;
(f) make a complaint; or
(g) cancel a contract, agreement or arrangement or otherwise terminate their 
relationship with the firm.
For the purposes of PRIN 2A.6.2R(4):
(1) unreasonable barriers are those which are likely to cause retail customers to take 
PRIN 2A.6.3G

[PAGE 43]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
unreasonable additional steps to progress their objectives, including:
(a) steps which are:
(i) unreasonably onerous or time consuming;
(ii) complex for a retail customer to carry out; or
(iii) difficult for a retail customer to understand; and
(b) asking retail customers for unnecessary information or evidence;
(2) where a firm has included appropriate friction in its customer journeys to comply 
with PRIN 2A.6.2R(3), this would not amount to an unreasonable barrier; and
(3) unreasonable additional costs includes where retail customers incur unreasonable 
exit fees or other charges, delays, distress or inconvenience.
PRIN 2A.6.4G
A firm would be unlikely to meet its obligations in PRIN 2A.6.2R if its support to retail 
customers causes or would be likely to cause:
(1) prospective retail customers to be prioritised over existing retail customers;
(2) unreasonable delays when retail customers attempt to engage with the firm, 
including disproportionately longer call waiting times to cancel or make changes to an 
existing product than to purchase a new product; or
(3) unreasonable delays to:
(a) any payments due to retail customers after they have been agreed;
(b) the firm requesting necessary information or evidence from retail 
customers; or
(c) the firm processing information or evidence received from retail customers.
Dealing with representatives
PRIN 2A.6.5R
(1) Where a person is authorised by a retail customer or by law to assist in the 
conduct of the retail customer’s affairs (such as a power of attorney), the firm must 
provide the same level of support to that person that they would have provided to the 
retail customer.
(2) PRIN 2A.6.5R(1) does not apply where the person assisting in the conduct of the 
retail customer’s affairs is also a firm.
Dealing with requests from other firms
PRIN 2A.6.6R
A firm must deal with reasonable requests from another firm in an effective way and in good 
time to enable the other firm to support retail customers.

[PAGE 44]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
Section : PRIN 2A.7 General
Expected standards under Principle 12 and PRIN 2A
PRIN 2A.7.1R
Principle 12 and the obligations in PRIN 2A must be interpreted in accordance with the 
standard that could reasonably be expected of a prudent firm:
(1) carrying on the same activity in relation to the same product; and
(2) taking appropriate account of the needs and characteristics of retail customers 
based on the needs and characteristics of retail customers in the relevant target 
market or of individual retail customers as the context requires.
What is reasonable depends on all the relevant circumstances, including:
(1) the nature of the product being offered or provided, in particular:
(a) the risk of harm to retail customers. For example, if a product is higher risk, 
firms should take additional care to ensure it meets retail customers’ needs, 
characteristics and objectives and is targeted appropriately;
(b) the product’s relative complexity. Retail customers may find it more difficult 
to assess the features, suitability or value offered by more complicated 
products. Long-term products where the outcome is not easy to predict, or 
non-standard charging structures, or other features which may not be easy for 
retail customers to understand may require greater care from a firm to 
promote, monitor and support consumer understanding;
(c) the costs, fees and charges involved with the product;
(d) the relative utility to retail customers of the product as a whole and of 
specific features, options, or services within the product, if subject to separate 
fees or charges;
(2) the characteristics of the retail customer or retail customers including (to the 
extent that a firm either knows about or should reasonably have known about them), 
in particular:
(a) their reasonable expectations in relation to the product; and
(b) their resources, degree of financial capability or sophistication, 
characteristics of vulnerability and corporate structure (where relevant).
(3) the firm’s role in relation to the product, including:
(a) the firm’s relationship with the retail customer. Acting reasonably does not 
require a firm to assume a fiduciary duty or require an advisory service where 
it does not already exist;
(b) whether the firm has provided or will provide advice to the retail customer. 
What is reasonable may be different where advice is being provided;
(c) the firm’s role in the product’s distribution chain, in particular its role in 
determining or materially influencing outcomes for retail customers in relation 
to the product;
(d) the stage in the firm’s relationship with the retail customer. There will be 
PRIN 2A.7.2G

[PAGE 45]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
times when retail customers are particularly exposed to harm, for example 
when they fall into arrears or are considering long-term investment decisions. 
The actions a firm needs to take to be acting reasonably in such 
circumstances may be greater than when a retail customer is making 
decisions which carry a lesser risk of adverse outcomes.
PRIN 2A.7.3G
Acting in a way that could reasonably be expected of a prudent firm requires more than 
adopting a single solution that is reasonable. It includes (among other things) considering 
whether the preferred solution provides good outcomes for all retail customers affected or 
only some; and if only some, why it does not work for all, and how best to identify additional 
actions which might mitigate the outcome for those adversely affected.
Protected characteristics and characteristics of vulnerability
PRIN 2A.7.4G
In relation to the needs and characteristics of retail customers, a firm should, among other 
things:
(1) pay appropriate regard to the nature and scale of characteristics of vulnerability 
that exist in any relevant target market;
(2) pay appropriate regard to the impact of characteristics of vulnerability on the 
needs of retail customers in any relevant target market;
(3) when dealing with a particular retail customer pay appropriate regard to the needs 
and characteristics of that retail customer, such as characteristics of vulnerability;
(4) assist frontline staff to understand how to actively identify information that could 
indicate vulnerability and, where relevant, seek information from retail customers with 
characteristics of vulnerability that will allow staff to respond to their needs; and
(5) set up systems and processes in a way that supports and enables retail 
customers with characteristics of vulnerability to disclose their needs.
PRIN 2A.7.5G
(1) Firms should be aware that groups of retail customers with specific protected 
characteristics may have, or be more likely to have, characteristics of vulnerability, for 
example older customers. In addition, where health is a driver of vulnerability it will 
likely have substantial overlap with the protected characteristic of ‘disability’ under the 
Equality Act 2010. Firms should be mindful of this when considering whether they are 
compliant with Principle 12 and PRIN 2A and their obligations under the Equality Act 
2010 or equivalent legislation.
(2) Firms should keep themselves appraised of any evidence that may emerge that 
retail customers with specific protected characteristics are more likely to have 
characteristics of vulnerability. Firms should take account of any such evidence when 
considering whether they are compliant with Principle 12 and PRIN 2A and their 
obligations under the Equality Act 2010 or equivalent legislation.

[PAGE 46]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
Section : PRIN 2A.8 Governance and culture
Governance, strategy and policies
PRIN 2A.8.1R
A firm must:
(1) ensure that Principle 12 and the obligations in this chapter are reflected in their 
strategies, governance, leadership and people policies, including incentives at all 
levels; and
(2) ensure that retail customer outcomes are a central focus of:
(a) the firm’s risk control arrangements under SYSC; and
(b) the firm’s internal audit function.
Staff incentives
PRIN 2A.8.2G
A firm should not use staff incentives, performance management or remuneration structures 
in a way that conflicts with their obligations under Principle 12 and PRIN 2A. Firms should 
be aware that these structures are capable of causing harm to retail customers and should 
design their structures in a way that is consistent with ensuring good outcomes for retail 
customers.
Governing body report
PRIN 2A.8.3R
A firm must prepare a report for its governing body setting out the results of its monitoring 
under PRIN 2A.9 and any actions required as a result of the monitoring.
PRIN 2A.8.4R
At least annually, the governing body of a firm must:
(1) review and approve the firm’s report on the outcomes being received by retail 
customers;
(2) confirm whether it is satisfied that the firm is complying with its obligations under 
Principle 12 and PRIN 2A; and
(3) assess whether the firm’s future business strategy is consistent with its 
obligations under Principle 12 and PRIN 2A.
PRIN 2A.8.5R
When approving the firm’s report under PRIN 2A.8.4R(1), the governing body of the firm 
must also agree:
(1) any action required to address any identified risk that retail customers may not 
receive good outcomes;
(2) any action required to address any identified instance where retail customers 
have not received good outcomes; and
(3) any amendments to the firm’s business strategy to ensure that it remains 
consistent with meeting the firm’s obligations under Principle 12 and PRIN 2A.

[PAGE 47]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
Section : PRIN 2A.9 Monitoring of consumer outcomes
General
PRIN 2A.9.1R
This section sets out the general obligation on firms to monitor under Principle 12 and PRIN 
2A the outcomes that retail customers are experiencing from their products.
PRIN 2A.9.2G
The purpose of the monitoring obligation is to enable firms to identify whether there are any 
risks that they are not meeting the requirements of the cross-cutting obligations and the 
retail customer outcomes, and consequently they are not acting to deliver good outcomes 
for retail customers.
PRIN 2A.9.3G
The frequency of monitoring, and the nature of the information a firm must collect to 
effectively monitor the outcomes received by retail customers depends on the type of firm 
and its role in the distribution chain, the nature of the product, and the target market.
PRIN 2A.9.4G
(1) The monitoring obligation applies proportionately to a firm’s role in the distribution 
chain. Where a firm does not have direct contact with retail customers it should 
monitor the outcomes of the service it provides, having regard to any information it 
has about the outcomes experienced by retail customers at the end of the distribution 
chain.
(2) A firm that does not have direct contact with retail customers should act 
reasonably to obtain information about the outcomes experienced by retail customers 
of the products the firm has distributed.
PRIN 2A.9.5G
To the extent that a firm is also required to carry out specific monitoring or reviews under 
any of the outcomes in PRIN 2A.3 to PRIN 2A.6, the specific monitoring or reviews form part 
of the general monitoring required by this section and firms may utilise the information 
gathered through these processes in preparing the report required under PRIN 2A.8.3R.
PRIN 2A.9.6G
In relation to communications, PRIN 2A.5.10R to PRIN 2A.5.14R set out specific 
requirements on the testing and monitoring of communications.
PRIN 2A.9.7G
Where a firm’s compliance with any other rules replaces their requirement to comply with 
provisions of PRIN 2A, or tends to show compliance with provisions of PRIN 2A, the firm 
may use any monitoring or reviews it carries out under those other rules in complying with 
its monitoring obligations under this section.
Requirement to monitor retail customer outcomes
A firm must regularly monitor the outcomes retail customers receive from:
(1) the products the firm manufactures or distributes;
(2) the communications the firm has with retail customers; and
PRIN 2A.9.8R

[PAGE 48]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
(3) the customer support the firm provides to retail customers.
PRIN 2A.9.9R
The monitoring carried out by a firm must enable it to determine at least:
(1) whether retail customers are being, or have been, sold products that have been 
designed to meet their needs, characteristics and objectives;
(2) whether the products that retail customers purchase provide fair value and 
appropriate action has been taken to address products identified as not providing fair 
value;
(3) whether retail customers are equipped with the right information to make effective, 
timely and properly informed decisions; and
(4) whether retail customers receive the support they need.
PRIN 2A.9.10R
The firm’s monitoring must also enable it to identify:
(1) whether the firm is complying with Principle 12 and the cross-cutting obligations in 
PRIN 2A.2;
(2) whether for any product the firm manufactures or distributes, any group of retail 
customers is experiencing different outcomes compared to another group of retail 
customers of the same product; and
(3) whether any retail customers have suffered harm as a result of the firm’s acts or 
omissions.
Action required of firms
PRIN 2A.9.11R
A firm must have in place processes to identify the root causes of any failure to deliver the 
outcomes listed in PRIN 2A.9.9R for retail customers.
PRIN 2A.9.12R
Where a firm identifies that:
(1) retail customers are not receiving the outcomes listed in PRIN 2A.9.9R, or there is 
a risk that retail customers will not receive these outcomes;
(2) any group of retail customers for a product are receiving worse outcomes than 
another group of retail customers for the same product;
(3) the firm is not complying with Principle 12 and the cross-cutting obligations in 
PRIN 2A.2,
it must take appropriate action to address the situation.
PRIN 2A.9.13G
PRIN 2A.9.12R does not require a firm to take action to remove the effects of risks inherent 
in a product that the firm reasonably believed the retail customer understood and accepted.
PRIN 2A.9.14G
Firms should have regard to PRIN 2A.10 in considering what may be appropriate action 
under PRIN 2A.9.12R.
Record keeping

[PAGE 49]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
PRIN 2A.9.15G
SYSC 3 and SYSC 9 contain high level requirements in relation to record keeping. Firms will 
need to decide, in line with these requirements, what records they need to keep in relation 
to their obligations under Principle 12, the cross-cutting obligations and the consumer 
outcomes.
Obligation to notify the FCA
PRIN 2A.9.16G
Firms are reminded of their obligations under Principle 11 to inform the FCA of anything 
relating to the firm of which the FCA would reasonably expect notice.
PRIN 2A.9.17R
A firm in a distribution chain must notify the FCA if it becomes aware that any other firm in 
that distribution chain is not or may not be complying with Principle 12 or PRIN 2A.

[PAGE 50]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
Section : PRIN 2A.10 Redress or other appropriate action
Purpose
PRIN 2A.10.1G
The purpose of this section is to set out the conduct required of firms where they identify 
foreseeable harm has been caused to retail customers.
Appropriate action
Where a firm is considering what action may be appropriate under PRIN 2A.2.5R:
(1) if a complaint or MiFID complaint has been received a firm shall follow the rules in 
DISP as applicable;
(2) if no complaint or MiFID complaint has been received the following rules and 
guidance apply with the modifications set out below:
(a) DISP 1.1A.20R as if it read:
Once foreseeable harm has been identified by a MiFID investment firm, the 
firm must:
(1)
investigate the circumstances which led to the 
foreseeable harm competently, diligently and 
impartially, obtaining additional information as 
necessary;
(2)
assess fairly, consistently and promptly:
(a)
the subject matter of the 
foreseeable harm;
(b)
[does not apply]
(c)
what remedial action or 
redress (or both) may 
be appropriate;
(d)
if appropriate, whether it 
has reasonable grounds 
to be satisfied that 
another firm may be 
solely or jointly 
responsible for causing 
the foreseeable harm;
(3)
comply promptly with any offer of remedial action 
or redress accepted by the retail customer.
(b) DISP 1.1A.21G as if it read:
Factors that may be relevant in the assessment of the foreseeable harm 
under DISP 1.1A.20R(2) include the following:
PRIN 2A.10.2R

[PAGE 51]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
(1)
all the evidence available and the 
particular circumstances of the 
foreseeable harm;
(2)
similarities with complaints received 
by the firm and with other instances 
in which foreseeable harm has been 
caused without a complaint;
(3)
relevant guidance published by the 
FCA, other relevant regulators, the 
Financial Ombudsman Service or 
former schemes; and
(4)
appropriate analysis of decisions by 
the Financial Ombudsman Service 
concerning complaints which were 
similar in their fact pattern or 
outcomes to the circumstances 
which led to the foreseeable harm in 
question.
(c) DISP 1.4.1R as if it read:
Once foreseeable harm has been identified by a firm, it must:
(1)
investigate the circumstances which led to the 
foreseeable harm competently, diligently and 
impartially, obtaining additional information as 
necessary;
(2)
assess fairly, consistently and promptly:
(a)
the subject matter of the 
foreseeable harm;
(b)
[does not apply]
(c)
what remedial action or 
redress (or both) may 
be appropriate;
(d)
if appropriate, whether it 
has reasonable grounds 
to be satisfied that 
another firm may be 
solely or jointly 
responsible for causing 
the foreseeable harm;

[PAGE 52]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
taking into account all relevant factors.
(3)
offer redress or remedial action when it decides 
this is appropriate;
(4)
explain to the retail customer promptly and in a 
way that is fair, clear and not misleading that harm 
has been identified, its assessment of the harm, 
its decision as to what action is appropriate and 
the fact that the retail customer has a right to 
make a complaint if it is not satisfied with that 
decision;
(5)
comply promptly with any offer of remedial action 
or redress accepted by the retail customer.
(d) DISP 1.4.2G as if it read:
Factors that may be relevant in the assessment of the foreseeable harm 
under DISP 1.4.1R(2) include the following:
(1)
all the evidence available and the 
particular circumstances of the 
foreseeable harm;
(2)
similarities with complaints received 
by the firm and with other instances 
in which foreseeable harm has been 
caused without a complaint;
(3)
relevant guidance published by the 
FCA, other relevant regulators, the 
Financial Ombudsman Service or 
former schemes; and
(4)
appropriate analysis of decisions by 
the Financial Ombudsman Service 
concerning complaints which were 
similar in their fact pattern or 
outcomes to the circumstances 
which led to the foreseeable harm in 
question (the procedures for which 
are described in DISP 1.3.2AG).
PRIN 2A.10.3R
A firm, MiFID investment firm or third country investment firm which identifies that it has 
caused retail customers foreseeable harm but which does not have a client relationship with 
that customer or the means to contact them shall take all reasonable steps to notify a 
customer of the matters in DISP 1.4.1R as modified by PRIN 2A.10.2R(2).

[PAGE 53]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
PRIN 2A.10.4G
Reasonable steps for the purposes of 2A.10.3R might include (among other things) 
contacting the distributor of the relevant product and asking whether information can be 
passed on to the retail customer.
PRIN 2A.10.5R
Where a firm, MiFID investment firm or third country investment firm identifies that a retail 
customer has been caused harm but concludes that another firm in the distribution chain 
was the sole or joint cause of that harm, it shall promptly notify that other firm and provide 
appropriate information about the harm caused.

[PAGE 54]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
Section : PRIN 2A.11 Sale and purchase of product books
PRIN 2A.11.1R
This section applies where:
(1) a firm has purchased or purchases a product book from another firm; and
(2) a firm sells a product book.
PRIN 2A.11.2R
(1) Where the product book was purchased before 31 July 2023, the firm must 
comply with Principle 12 and PRIN 2A.
(2) Unless:
(a) the firm was a co-manufacturer of the product; or
(b) the firm has significantly adapted the product on or after 31 July 2023,
the requirement in (1) to comply with PRIN 2A.3 and PRIN 2A.4 is a requirement on 
the firm to use its best endeavours to comply with the applicable rules in those 
chapters.
PRIN 2A.11.3G
A firm that is required to apply PRIN 2A.3 or PRIN 2A.4 to a product book on a ‘best 
endeavours’ basis should continue to have regard to the RPPD and should read references 
in the RPPD to Principles 6 and 7 as referring to Principle 12.
PRIN 2A.11.4R
(1) This rule applies where a product book is sold for the first time after 31 July 2023.
(2) The firm selling the product book must provide relevant information to the 
purchasing firm to enable the purchasing firm to comply with Principle 12 and PRIN 
2A from the date of purchase.
(3) A firm which purchases a product book after 31 July 2023 must carry out sufficient 
due diligence to ensure they understand in particular:
(a) whether any group or groups of retail customers of the product have 
characteristics of vulnerability or as a group have in common a specific 
protected characteristic in the same form (for example customers of the same 
sex or race);
(b) the outcome of the selling firm’s product approval process for the product 
book and the outcome of any product reviews carried out by the selling firm 
under PRIN 2A.3;
(c) the benefits the product is intended to provide and the costs the retail 
customer pays for the product; and
(d) the basis on which the product has been assessed as providing fair value 
under PRIN 2A.4.
(4) The due diligence conducted by the purchasing firm must be sufficient to enable 
the purchasing firm to comply with Principle 12 and PRIN 2A in respect of the product 
book.
Where a firm purchases a product book after 31 July 2023 and the first sale of that product 
PRIN 2A.11.5R

[PAGE 55]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
book took place before 31 July 2023, the firm must apply PRIN 2A.11.2R.
.
.

[PAGE 56]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
.
.
.
.
.
CHAPTER
PRIN 3 Rules about application
PRIN 3 Rules about application

[PAGE 57]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
Section : PRIN 3.1 Who?
PRIN 3.1.1R
PRIN applies to every firm, except that it does not apply to a firm in relation to its carrying on 
of auction regulation bidding.
PRIN 3.1.1AR
PRIN also applies:
(1) to an electronic money institution, an authorised payment institution, a small 
payment institution or a registered account information service provider; and
(2) [deleted]
PRIN 3.1.1BR
(1) Principle 7 applies to a registered person communicating a financial promotion 
relating to one or more qualifying cryptoassets (in reliance on the exemption in article 
73ZA of the Financial Promotion Order) as it applies to an authorised person 
communicating a financial promotion relating to one or more qualifying cryptoassets 
(PRIN 3.2.2R), disregarding the effect of PRIN 3.2.10R.
(2) For the purpose of (1), relevant references in this sourcebook to a firm include 
reference to a registered person.
PRIN 3.1.6R
A firm will not be subject to a Principle or PRIN 2A to the extent that it would be contrary to 
the requirements of an EU measure passed or made before IP completion day, to the extent 
that those requirements continue to have effect after IP completion day under the EUWA.
PRIN 3.1.7G
PRIN 4 provides specific guidance on the application of the Principles and PRIN 2A for 
MiFID business.
PRIN 3.1.8G
The Principles will not apply to the extent that they purport to impose an obligation which is 
inconsistent with requirements which implemented the Payment Services Directive, the 
Consumer Credit Directive or the Electronic Money Directive. For example, there may be 
circumstances in which Principle 12 and PRIN 2A may be limited by the conduct of business 
obligations derived from the Payment Services Directive and the Electronic Money Directive 
and applicable to payment service providers and electronic money issuers (see Parts 6 and 
7 of the Payment Services Regulations and Part 5 of the Electronic Money Regulations) or 
derived from the Consumer Credit Directive (see, for example, the information requirements 
in the Consumer Credit (Disclosure of Information) Regulations 2010 (SI 2010/1013)).
PRIN 3.1.9R
PRIN applies to a TP firm, except that Principle 4 only applies to the extent that a TP firm is 
subject to rules relating to capital adequacy.
(1) Only Principles 1, 2, 3, 9, 11, 12 and PRIN 2A apply to a TP UCITS qualifier, and 
only with respect to the activities in PRIN 3.2.2R (Communication and approval of 
financial promotions).
(2) Where Principle 12 and PRIN 2A do not apply, Principle 7 also applies to a TP 
PRIN 3.1.10R

[PAGE 58]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
UCITS qualifier with respect to the activities in PRIN 3.2.2R.
PRIN 3.1.11G
For the purposes of PRIN 3.1.9R, a TP firm should refer to GEN 2.2.30R and GEN 2.2.31G 
to determine which rules relating to capital adequacy apply to it.
PRIN 3.1.12R
Principle 12 and PRIN 2A only apply where a client is a retail customer, or there is 
distribution chain which involves a retail customer.
PRIN 3.1.13R
Principle 12 and PRIN 2A apply to:
(1) a TP firm; and
(2) a Gibraltar-based firm.

[PAGE 59]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
Section : PRIN 3.2 What?
PRIN 3.2.1AR
PRIN (other than Principle 12 and PRIN 2A) applies with respect to the carrying on of:
(1) regulated activities;
(2) activities that constitute dealing in investments as principal, disregarding the 
exclusion in article 15 of the Regulated Activities Order (Absence of holding out etc);
(3) ancillary activities in relation to designated investment business, home finance 
activity, regulated funeral plan activity, credit-related regulated activity, insurance 
distribution activity, regulated pensions dashboard activity and accepting deposits; 
and
(4) activities directly arising from insurance risk transformation.
PRIN 3.2.1BR
Other than with respect to a firm that is a credit union, PRIN also applies with respect to:
(1) the provision of payment services;
(2) issuing of electronic money (where not the activity of issuing electronic money 
specified in article 9B of the Regulated Activities Order); and
(3) activities connected to the provision of payment services and to the issuing of 
electronic money (whether or not the activity of issuing electronic money specified in 
article 9B of the Regulated Activities Order).
PRIN 3.2.1CG
Issuing of electronic money will therefore be covered under either PRIN 3.2.1AR(1) where it 
is the regulated activity of issuing electronic money specified in article 9B of the Regulated 
Activities Order, or under PRIN 3.2.1BR where it is not that regulated activity.
PRIN 3.2.2R
PRIN also applies with respect to the communication and approval of financial promotions 
which:
(1) if communicated by an unauthorised person without approval would contravene 
section 21(1) of the Act (Restrictions on financial promotion); and
(2) may be communicated by a firm without contravening section 238(1) of the Act 
(Restrictions on promotion of collective investment schemes).
PRIN 3.2.2-AG
PRIN applies to the communication of promotions concerning payment services and 
electronic money.
PRIN 3.2.3R
Subject to PRIN 3.2.4R, Principles 3, 4 and (in so far as it relates to disclosing to the FCA) 
11 (and this chapter) also:
(1) apply to firms with respect to the carrying on of unregulated activities (for Principle 
3 this is only in a prudential context); and
(2) for firms and other persons that are subject to the Principles, take into account 
any activity of other members of a group of which the firm is a member.

[PAGE 60]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
PRIN 3.2.4R
In relation to an Annex II benchmark administrator which:
(1) administers only benchmarks which are subject to Annex II to the benchmarks 
regulation; and
(2) does not have permission to carry on any other regulated activities in relation to 
which Principle 11 applies,
Principle 11 (in so far as it relates to disclosing to the FCA) applies only to the regulated 
activity of administering a benchmark.
PRIN 3.2.5G
The FCA only expects an Annex II benchmark administrator subject to PRIN 3.2.4R to 
disclose information under Principle 11 which is relevant to the firm’s compliance with its 
obligations under the benchmarks regulation.
Principle 12 and PRIN 2A: additional application provisions
PRIN 3.2.6R
(1) Principle 12 and PRIN 2A apply to a firm’s retail market business, including in 
respect of existing products and closed products.
(2) 
(a) Subject to (b), Principle 12 and PRIN 2A apply to a firm with respect to the 
communication or approval of a financial promotion (see PRIN 3.2.2R), but 
only if the financial promotion is addressed to, or disseminated in such a way 
that it is likely to be received by, a retail customer.
(b) Principle 12 and PRIN 2A do not apply to the communication or approval of 
a financial promotion to the extent that the financial promotion relates to an 
activity that is excluded from the definition of retail market business by virtue 
of limbs (1) to (6) of that definition.
(3) If the firm is a credit union, and except insofar as Principle 12 and PRIN 2A apply 
by virtue of (2), then Principle 12 and PRIN 2A do not apply to the following activities:
(a) payment services and activities connected to the provision of payment 
services, except where the activity is an ancillary activity in relation to a 
regulated activity other than issuing electronic money; and
(b) activities connected to or ancillary activities in relation to issuing electronic 
money, but only insofar as the activity is not an ancillary activity in relation to 
another regulated activity.
PRIN 3.2.7R
Where Principle 12 and PRIN 2A apply to the activities of a firm operating in a distribution 
chain, Principle 12 and PRIN 2A apply only to the extent that the person is responsible in 
the course of carrying out those activities for determining or materially influencing retail 
customer outcomes.
PRIN 3.2.8R
Subject to PRIN 3.2.7R, Principle 12 and PRIN 2A do not apply to activities to the extent 
that those activities are not included in a rule which sets out the scope of protections offered 
to retail customers by COBS, ICOBS, MCOB, BCOBS, CMCOB, FPCOB, PROD or CONC.
Interaction between Principle 12 and Principles 6 and 7

[PAGE 61]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
PRIN 3.2.10R
Principles 6 and 7 do not apply to a firm’s activities to the extent that Principle 12 and PRIN 
2A apply.
PRIN 3.2.11G
Activities to which Principles 6 and 7 rather than Principle 12 and PRIN 2A may apply 
include, for example, services provided to professional clients.
PRIN 3.2.12G
Principle 12 and PRIN 2A have a broader application than Principles 6 and 7, for example 
they apply to firms in the distribution chain for whom the retail customer may not be a client.

[PAGE 62]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
Section : PRIN 3.3 Where?
Territorial application of the Principles
Principle
Territorial application
Principles 1, 2 and 3
in a prudential context, apply with respect to 
activities wherever they are carried on; 
otherwise, apply with respect to activities 
carried on from an establishment 
maintained by the firm (or its appointed 
representative) in the United Kingdom, or in 
respect of regulated claims management 
activities, apply with respect to activity 
carried on in Great Britain, even if the 
establishment from which it is carried on is 
not located in the UK (see PERG 2.4A), 
unless another applicable rule or onshored 
regulation which is relevant to the activity 
has a wider territorial scope, in which case 
the Principle applies with that wider scope 
in relation to the activity described in that 
rule or onshored regulation.
Principle 4
applies with respect to activities wherever 
they are carried on.
Principle 5
if the activities have, or might reasonably be 
regarded as likely to have, a negative effect 
on confidence in the UK financial system, 
applies with respect to activities wherever 
they are carried on; otherwise, applies with 
respect to activities carried on from an 
establishment maintained by the firm (or its 
appointed representative) in the United 
Kingdom, or in respect of regulated claims 
management activities, applies with respect 
to activity carried on in Great Britain, even if 
the establishment from which it is carried on 
is not located in the UK (see PERG 2.4A).
Principle 8, in a prudential context, applies 
with respect to activities wherever they are 
carried on; otherwise these Principles apply 
with respect to activities carried on from an 
establishment maintained by the firm (or its 
Principles 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10

[PAGE 63]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
Principle
Territorial application
appointed representative) in the United 
Kingdom, or in respect of regulated claims 
management activities, apply with respect 
to activity carried on in Great Britain, even if 
the establishment from which it is carried on 
is not located in the UK (see PERG 2.4A), 
unless another applicable rule or onshored 
regulation which is relevant to the activity 
has a wider territorial scope, in which case 
the Principle applies with that wider scope 
in relation to the activity described in that 
rule or onshored regulation.
Principle 11
applies with respect to activities wherever 
they are carried on.
Principle 12 and PRIN 2A
apply with respect to activities carried on 
with retail customers located in the United 
Kingdom unless another applicable rule or 
onshored regulation which is relevant to the 
activity has a different territorial scope, in 
which case Principle 12 and PRIN 2A apply 
with that scope in relation to the activity 
described in that rule or onshored 
legislation.
PRIN 3.3.3R
PRIN 3.3.1R applies to electronic money institutions, payment institutions and registered 
account information service providers as if the references to a firm were references to a 
person within that description, and references to an appointed representative were to an 
agent of such a person within the meaning of the Payment Services Regulations.
PRIN 3.3.4R
Notwithstanding PRIN 3.3.1R, PRIN applies to:
(1) a TP firm with respect to activities carried on from an establishment maintained by 
the firm (or its appointed representative) in the United Kingdom;
(2) a TP firm with respect to services provided into the United Kingdom by the firm (or 
its appointed representative) from an establishment in an EEA State; and
(3) a TP UCITS qualifier with respect to the firm’s activities in relation to the AIF or 
scheme in question, in the United Kingdom.

[PAGE 64]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
Section : PRIN 3.4 General
Clients and the Principles
PRIN 3.4.-1
PRIN 3.4.1R, PRIN 3.4.2R and PRIN 1 Annex 1 do not apply with respect to:
(1) credit-related regulated activities; or
(2) regulated claims management activities; or
(3) regulated funeral plan activities; or
(4) payment services; or
(4A) regulated pensions dashboard activity; or
(5) the issuing of electronic money (where not a regulated activity).
PRIN 3.4.1R
For business other than MiFID or equivalent third country business, the only requirement of 
Principle 7 relating to eligible counterparties is that a firm must communicate information to 
eligible counterparties in a way that is not misleading.
PRIN 3.4.1AG
Principle 7 applies in full to MiFID or equivalent third country business.
PRIN 3.4.2R
For the purposes of PRIN, a firm intending to carry on, or carrying on, activities that do not 
involve designated investment business, may treat a client as an eligible counterparty in 
accordance with PRIN 1 Annex 1 R.
Guarantors etc
PRIN 3.4.3AR
(1) Paragraph (2) applies in relation to an individual who:
(a) has provided, or is to provide, a guarantee or an indemnity (or both) in 
relation to a regulated credit agreement, a regulated consumer hire agreement 
or a P2P agreement; and
(b) is not the borrower or the hirer.
(2) If the individual is not a customer, they are to be treated as if they were a 
customer for the purposes of Principles 6 and 7 and as if they were a retail customer 
for the purposes of Principle 12 and PRIN 2A.
(3) For the purposes of this rule, a guarantee does not include a legal or equitable 
mortgage or a pledge.
Actions for damages
PRIN 3.4.4R
A contravention of the rules in PRIN does not give rise to a right of action by a private 
person under section 138D of the Act (and each of those rules is specified under section 
138D(3) of the Act as a provision giving rise to no such right of action).
Reference to "regulators" in Principle 11
Where Principle 11 refers to regulators, this means, in addition to the FCA, other regulators 
PRIN 3.4.5R

[PAGE 65]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
with recognised jurisdiction in relation to regulated activities, payment services and 
electronic money whether in the United Kingdom or abroad.
.
.

[PAGE 66]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
.
.
.
.
.
CHAPTER
PRIN 4 Principles: MiFID business
PRIN 4 Principles: MiFID business

[PAGE 67]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
Section : PRIN 4.1 Principles: MiFID business
PRIN 4.1.1G
PRIN 3.1.6 R gives effect to the provisions of the EUWA concerning the continuing 
application of the principle of the supremacy of EU law. It ensures that the Principles and 
PRIN 2A do not impose obligations upon firms which are inconsistent with a relevant EU 
measure. If a Principle or PRIN 2A does purport to impose such an obligation PRIN 3.1.6 R 
disapplies that Principle or provision of PRIN 2A, but only to the extent necessary to ensure 
compatibility with the relevant EU measure. This disapplication has practical effect only for 
certain matters covered by MiFID, which are explained in this section.
Where?
PRIN 4.1.2G
Under PRIN 3.3.1 R, the territorial application of a number of Principles and PRIN 2A to a 
UK MiFID investment firm is extended to the extent that another applicable rule or onshored 
regulation which is relevant to an activity has a wider territorial scope.
PRIN 4.1.3G
Principles 4, 5 and 11 will have the same scope of territorial application for MiFID business 
as for other business.
What?
PRIN 4.1.4G
(1) Certain requirements derived from MiFID are disapplied for:
(a) eligible counterparty business;
(b) transactions concluded under the rules governing a multilateral trading 
facility between its members or participants or between the multilateral trading 
facility and its members or participants in relation to the use of the multilateral 
trading facility;
(c) transactions concluded on a regulated market between its members or 
participants.
(2) Under PRIN 3.1.6 R, these disapplications may affect Principles 1, 2, 6, 9, 12 and 
PRIN 2A. PRIN 3.1.6 R applies only to the extent that the application of a Principle or 
PRIN 2A would be contrary to the UK's obligations under a relevant EU measure in 
respect of a particular transaction or matter. In line with MiFID, these limitations 
relating to eligible counterparty business and transactions under the rules of a 
multilateral trading facility or on a regulated market only apply in relation to a firm's 
conduct of business obligations to its clients derived from MiFID. They do not limit the 
application of those Principles or PRIN 2A in relation to other matters, such as client 
asset protections, systems and controls, prudential requirements and market 
integrity. Further information about these limitations is contained in COBS 1 Annex 1.
(3) Principles 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 10 and 11 are not limited in this way.

[PAGE 68]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
.
.

[PAGE 69]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
.
.
.
.
.
CHAPTER
PRIN TP 1 Transitional provisions
PRIN TP 1 Transitional provisions

[PAGE 70]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
Section : PRIN TP 1 Transitional provisions
 
 
Material to 
which the 
transitional 
provision 
applies
Transitional 
Provision
Transitional 
Provision: 
dates in 
force
Handbook 
provision: 
coming into 
force
1.
PRIN 1 
Annex 1 R 
1.2(2)
R
A firm need 
not comply 
with PRIN 
Ann 1R 
1.2(2) in 
relation to an 
eligible 
counterparty 
if the client 
was correctly 
categorised 
as a market 
counterparty 
on 31 
October 
2007 and the 
firm complied 
with COB 
4.1.12 R (2) 
(Large 
intermediate 
customer 
classified as 
market 
counterparty)
.
From 1 
November 
2007 
indefinitely
1 November 
2007
Principle 12 
and PRIN 2A 
apply in 
relation to 
ancillary 
activities or 
other 
connected 
2
Principle 12 
and PRIN 2A
R
From 31 July 
2023 
indefinitely
31 July 2023
PRIN TP 1.1

[PAGE 71]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
Material to 
which the 
transitional 
provision 
applies
Transitional 
Provision
Transitional 
Provision: 
dates in 
force
Handbook 
provision: 
coming into 
force
activities in 
accordance 
with PRIN 
3.2 where 
those 
activities are 
carried on 
after 31 July 
2023 
regardless of 
whether the 
underlying 
activities 
were carried 
on before or 
after 31 July 
2023.
An example 
of how PRIN 
TP 1.1 
paragraph 2 
applies is 
that a firm 
which has 
accepted a 
deposit prior 
to 31 July 
2023 would 
be subject to 
Principle 12 
and PRIN 2A 
in respect of 
customer 
services or 
other 
ancillary 
activities 
related to 
3
Principle 12 
and PRIN 2A
G
From 31 July 
2023 
indefinitely
31 July 2023

[PAGE 72]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
Material to 
which the 
transitional 
provision 
applies
Transitional 
Provision
Transitional 
Provision: 
dates in 
force
Handbook 
provision: 
coming into 
force
that deposit 
carried on 
after 31 July 
2023.
4
Principle 12 
and PRIN 2A
R
Except to the 
extent 
specified in 
PRIN TP5 
and TP6, the 
provisions 
listed in 
column 2 
only apply to 
a closed 
product from 
31 July 2024.
From 31 July 
2023 
indefinitely
31 July 2023
5
PRIN 2A.3 
and PRIN 
2A.4
R
A 
manufacturer 
of a closed 
product must 
review the 
closed 
product by 
31 July 2024 
and ensure it 
meets the 
requirements 
of PRIN 2A.3 
and PRIN 
2A.4, 
including 
taking any 
appropriate 
mitigating 
action 
required by 
those rules.
From 31 July 
2023 to 31 
July 2024
31 July 2023

[PAGE 73]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
Material to 
which the 
transitional 
provision 
applies
Transitional 
Provision
Transitional 
Provision: 
dates in 
force
Handbook 
provision: 
coming into 
force
Where a firm 
proposes to 
sell a book of 
closed 
products 
between 31 
July 2023 
and 30 July 
2024 
inclusive:
(1) the 
purchasing 
firm will only 
be required 
to comply 
with Principle 
12 and PRIN 
2A from 31 
July 2024;
(2) the 
selling firm is 
not required 
to provide 
the 
information 
specified in 
PRIN 
2A.11.4R(3)(
b) and (d); 
and
(3) the 
selling firm 
must provide 
relevant 
information 
to enable the 
purchasing 
6
PRIN 
2A.11.4R
R
From 31 July 
2023 to 31 
July 2024
31 July 2023

[PAGE 74]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
Material to 
which the 
transitional 
provision 
applies
Transitional 
Provision
Transitional 
Provision: 
dates in 
force
Handbook 
provision: 
coming into 
force
firm to 
comply with 
the 
obligations 
that will 
apply to it 
from 31 July 
2024.
7
PRIN 
2A.8.3R-
2A.8.5R and 
PRIN 2A.9
G
Where a firm 
has both 
existing and 
closed 
products the 
first annual 
report 
compiled by 
the firm 
under PRIN 
2A.8.3R-
2A.8.5R 
using its 
monitoring 
under PRIN 
2A.9 need 
only refer to 
the firm’s 
new and 
existing 
products.
From 31 July 
2023 
indefinitely
31 July 2023
.
.

[PAGE 75]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
.
.
.
.
.
CHAPTER
PRIN Sch 1 Record Keeping 
Requirements
PRIN Sch 1 Record Keeping Requirements

[PAGE 76]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
Section : PRIN Sch 1 Record Keeping Requirements
.
.

[PAGE 77]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
.
.
.
.
.
CHAPTER
PRIN Sch 2 Notification requirements
PRIN Sch 2 Notification requirements

[PAGE 78]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
Section : PRIN Sch 2 Notification requirements
PRIN Sch 2.1
The aim of the guidance in the following table is to give the reader a quick over-all view of 
the relevant requirements for notification and reporting.
It is not a complete statement of those requirements and should not be relied on as if it 
were.
PRIN Sch 2.2
Handbook 
reference
Matter to be 
notified
Contents of 
notification
Trigger event
Time allowed
Principle 11 
(PRIN 2.1.1 R)
Anything 
relating to the 
firm of which the 
appropriate 
regulator would 
reasonably 
expect notice
Appropriate 
disclosure
Anything 
relating to the 
firm of which the 
appropriate 
regulator would 
reasonably 
expect notice
Appropriate
.
.

[PAGE 79]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
.
.
.
.
.
CHAPTER
PRIN Sch 3 Fees and other required 
payments
PRIN Sch 3 Fees and other required payments

[PAGE 80]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
Section : PRIN Sch 3 Fees and other required payments
.
.

[PAGE 81]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
.
.
.
.
.
CHAPTER
PRIN Sch 3 Fees and other required 
payments
PRIN Sch 3 Fees and other required payments

[PAGE 82]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
Section : PRIN Sch 3 Fees and other required payments
.
.

[PAGE 83]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
.
.
.
.
.
CHAPTER
PRIN Sch 5 Rights of action for damages
PRIN Sch 5 Rights of action for damages

[PAGE 84]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
Section : PRIN Sch 5 Rights of action for damages
PRIN Sch 5.1
If a "Yes" appears in the column headed "For private person?", the rule may be actionable 
by a "private person" under section 138D (or, in certain circumstances, his fiduciary or 
representative; see article 6(2) and (3)(c) of the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 
(Rights of Action) Regulations 2001 (SI 2001 No 2256)). A "Yes" in the column headed 
"Removed" indicates that the FCA has removed the right of action under section 138D(3) 
of the Act. If so, a reference to the rule in which it is removed is also given.
PRIN Sch 5.2
If a "Yes" appears in the column headed "For private person?", the rule may be actionable 
by a "private person" under section 138D (or, in certain circumstances, his fiduciary or 
representative; see article 6(2) and (3)(c) of the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 
(Rights of Action) Regulations 2001 (SI 2001 No 2256)). A "Yes" in the column headed 
"Removed" indicates that the FCA has removed the right of action under section 138D(3) 
of the Act. If so, a reference to the rule in which it is removed is also given.
PRIN Sch 5.3
The column headed "For other person?" indicates whether the rule may be actionable by 
a person other than a private person (or his fiduciary or representative) under article 6(2) 
and (3) of those Regulations. If so, an indication of the type of person by whom the rule 
may be actionable is given.
PRIN Sch 5.4
Right of Action
Chapter/Ap
pendix
Section/Ann
ex
Paragraph
For private 
person?
Removed?
For other 
person?
All rules in PRIN
No
Yes
PRIN 3.4.4 R
No
.
.

[PAGE 85]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
.
.
.
.
.
CHAPTER
PRIN Sch 6 Rules that can be waived
PRIN Sch 6 Rules that can be waived

[PAGE 86]
PRIN
PRIN Principles for Businesses
www.handbook.fca.org.uk
February 2026
Section : PRIN Sch 6 Rules that can be waived
PRIN Sch 6.1A
As a result of section 138A of the Act (Modification or waiver of rules) the FCA has power to 
waive all its rules, other than rules made under section 137O (Threshold condition code), 
section 247 (Trust scheme rules), section 248 (Scheme particular rules), section 261I 
(Contractual scheme rules) or section 261J (Contractual scheme particulars rules) of the 
Act.
.
.